P
E LI C A N B O O K ‘
R. H. BARROW
The Romans
An analysis of Rome’s achievement
and of her contribution to the
founding of Western Civilization,
written from the point of view that
the study of the past is of vital
importance for the understanding
of ourselves, and that the essence
of Roman genius and character is
no mean part of that study.
Idt
2/-
R. H. BARROW
WITH SO MANY TEACHERS AND WITH SO MANY
EXAMPLES HAS ANTIQUITY FURNISHED US THAT
NO AGE CAN BE THOUGHT MORE FORTUNATE IN
THE CHANCE OF ITS BIRTH THAN OUR OWN AGE,
FOR WHOSE INSTRUCTION MEN OF EARLIER GENERATIONS HAVE EARNESTLY LABOURED.
QUINTILIAN (A.D.35-95)
PENGUIN BOOKS
HARMGNDSWORTH . MIDDLESEX
CONTENTS
X (a) What manner of men ? 9
(b) ‘The old ways’ 14
II (a) Kings, Republic, Empire 27
{b) From the Seven Hills to the Roman Orb 29
{c) From City-state to Republic in ruins 43
III (a) The new ways and the old 59
{b) Cicero 69
IV [a) Restoration and the Augustan 80
Principate: Vergil and Horace and Livy
(b) The first and second centuries a.d. 89
V What the Romans wrote about 114
VI The Roman practical genius 130
VII The Roman attitude to Religion 144
and Philosophy
vni The age of crisis and rescue: Diocletian 167
and Constantine
IX Christianity and the Roman Empire 179
X The fifth century 192
XI Roman law 209
Epilogue 1
CO
—(
C l
Table of Dates 220
Index 223
THE ROMANS
to be found in them. It may well be said, in the words of
the Greek Polybius, 205-123 b.c., himself a sceptic,
‘What more than anything else distinguishes the Roman
state and sets it above all others is its attitude to the
gods. It seems to me that what is a reproach to other
communities actually holds together the Roman state
- I mean its awe ofthe gods’, and he uses the same word
which St Paul used on Mars’ Hill in Athens. Polybius
was not to know that at the very end, when the Roman
Empire was overrun by barbarians, it would be the idea
ofthe greatness and eternity ofRome which would hold
together belief in the gods.
(£) ‘the old ways’
Roman religion was the religion, first of the family,
then ofthe extension ofthe family, the state. The family
was consecrate, so, therefore, was the state. The simple
ideas and rites held and practised by families were adjusted and enlarged, partly by new conceptions created
by new needs, partly by contact with other races and
cultures, when families came together to form settlements and so eventually to fashion the city of Rome.
Anthropologists have given the name ‘animism’ to the
stage of primitive religion which supposes a ‘power’ or
‘spirit’ or ‘will’ to reside in everything. To the primitive Roman, numen, power, or will, resided everywhere,
or rather it manifested itself everywhere by action. All
that can be known about itis that it acts, but the manner
of its acting is undetermined. Man is an intruder into
the realm ofspirit, whose characteristic is action. How
can he mitigate the awe which he feels, and how can he
secure that the numen shall produce the requisite action,
and so win for himself the ‘peace of the gods’ ?
The first need is to ‘fix’ this vague power in a way
14
THE ROMANS
acceptable to it, and so to narrow or to focus its action
into this or that purpose vital to man. It was thought
that to name its manifestation in individual phenomena
gave definition to what was vague, and, so to speak,
piped the energy into the desired end. And so, as the
actions of the farmer and his family, engaged in agriculture and weaving and cooking and bringing up
children, were many, so the activity of this power was
split up into innumerable named powers energising the
actions of the household. Every minute operation of
nature and man - the manifold life of the fields, the
daily tasks of the farmer, the daily round of his wife,
the growth and care of their children -took place in
the presence and by the energy of these vague powers,
now becoming formless deities.
. With ‘naming’, i.e. invocation, went prayers and
offerings of food and meal, milk and wine, and, on
occasion, animal sacrifice. The appropriate words and
rites were known to the head ofthe family, who was the
priest. Words and ritual were passed on from father to
son till they were fixed immutably. A flaw in invocation
or ceremony would prevent the numen from issuing into
the action which the family or individual was undertaking, and so failure would result. The names ofmany
ofthese household gods have passed into the languages
of Europe: Vesta, the spirit of the hearth-fire; the
Penates, the preservers of the store-cupboard; the
Lares, the guardians of the house. But there were very
many others. Daily prayer was said; the family meal
was a religious ceremony, and incense and libations
were offered. Certain festivals related to the dead, who
were sometimes regarded as hostile and therefore to be
expelled from the house by rite, sometimes as kindly
spirits to be associated closely with all family festivals
and anniversaries.
15
THE ROMANS
When the families coalesced to form a community,
family cult and ritual formed the basis of state cult.
At first the king was the priest; when kings ceased to
exist, the title survived as ‘king of the sacred things’.
To help the ‘king’ were ‘colleges’ of priests, that is to
say, ordinary men, not a special caste, who were
colleagues together in ordering worship and festivals.
The chief college was that of the pontifices, which took
charge of the accumulated lore, made rules, and kept
records of feasts and of outstanding events of religious
significance to the state. They built up a sacred law
{ius divinum). Minor colleges assisted them; thus, the
Vestal Virgins tended the hearth-fire of the state, the
augurs took the omens from the flight of birds or from
the entrails of a sacrificed animal; for the gods were
supposed to impress on the sensitive organs of a consecrated animal signs of approval or of disapproval. The
agricultural festivals of the farmstead were given
national importance; the harvest, the safety of the
boundaries, the hunting of wolves from the fields became the concern ofthe city. New festivals were added,
and the list was kept in a Calendar, of which we have
records. In his origin Mars was a god ofthe fields; the
farmer-soldiers, organised for war, turned him into a
god of battle. New gods came to the notice of the
Romans as their horizon widened; and deities of the
Etruscan and Greek cities in Italy found their way into
the Calendar. Jupiter, Juno and Minerva came from
Etruria; the Greek Hephaistos was equated with
Volcanus, whom the Romans took over from their
Etruscan neighbours. There were many ‘Italic’ deities
too, for, though we have spoken for simplicity’s sake of
Romans, Rome was itselfmade up of a fusion of Italic
tribes with special cults oftheir own, no doubt bearing
a certain family likeness.
l6 THE ROMANS
The formulae ofinvocation and prayer were handed
down and elaborated and recorded unchanged by the
colleges. In later centuries a priest could use a liturgy
phrased in a tongue which he did not understand, and
the people took part in rites whose meaning was only
dimly apprehended, yet which meant something. Processions and holidays, amusements and sacrifices impressed the state-worship upon the popular mind. We
shall see later how the full flood of Greek and Oriental
religious ideas broke upon Rome and how myth and
story were adopted to furnish the picturesqueness
which the native religion lacked. For, especially in the
fourth and third centuries b.c., new cults were brought
into the religious practice ofthe state, though as regards
myth and ritual they were stamped with the Roman
mark. But the influx of ideas never penetrated to the
heart ofthe old Roman religion, which was fixed in its
essential nature. It continued both in the city and in the
countryside, as is abundantly clear when the evidence
of literature and inscriptions becomes most plentiful.
Educated men ofthe last century b.c., conversant with
Greek philosophy and criticism, might regard it as
mere form; but those same men held offices in the
sacred colleges and encouraged its practice in the state,
and indeed too in the family. Augustus, the first Emperor, was not building on nothing when he sought to
rescue from the collapse ofthe state, and to re-erect, the
old Roman religion and the morality associated with it.
A strong morality was supported by this cold and
formless religion, and the growth of morality was unhampered by mythology. For the Greeks Homer had
enshrined stories of gods in everlasting verse - till in a
later age critics had protested that his gods were less
moral than men. The Romans had no sacred writings
beyond the formulae of prayer; there was therefore no
17
THE ROMANS
myth-made morality to be undone. The individual’s
business was to establish right relations with the gods,
not to speculate about their nature. The city’s business
was the same, and the individual was left to indulge in
private beliefs of his own if he wished. The Roman
attitude is always the same - tolerance, provided that
no harm was done to public morals and that no attack
was made upon the state as a state. The Roman attached
to the god his own morality as he developed. The process may be illustrated thus:
One of the earliest powers to be individualised was
the power ofthe sunlight and sky; it was called Jupiter,
if indeed Jupiter was not the single spirit from which
other numina were individualised. It was an early custom to swear an oath in the open air under the sky,
where no secret could be hidden from an all-seeing
power. Under this aspect of an oath-witnessing power
Hercules received the epithet Fidius, ‘concerned with
good faith’. Again the individualising tendency came
into play; Fides, ‘good faith’, was personified, the
abstract from the epithet. The process went on; epithets
were attached to Fides to denote the different spheres in
which Fides operated.
This ability to abstract an essential characteristic is
part of the mental process of the lawyer. The Romans
showed the capacity to isolate the important and to
pursue its applications; hence their jurisprudence. In
the kind of speculation which demands a creative
imagination but seems almost to ignore the data of
experience they failed. But, more important, the isolation ofmoral ideas gave those ideas an added emphasis;
in the household and in the state moral ideas received a
status similar in kind to the status ofthe ‘powers’ themselves. They were real things in themselves, and were
not created by opinion; they had objective validity. It
18 THE ROMANS
is beside the mark to suggest that abstract qualities can
scarcely have inspired any warmth of religious feeling,
for neither did the ‘powers’ themselves. Moreover, the
qualities soon found embodiment in a long line of‘noble
Romans’. The point is that moral ideas were enveloped
with the sanctity ofreligious cult, and later literature is
not understood ifthe virtues, to which appeal is so often
made by historian and orator, are not interpreted in
this way. They were bound up with the duty laid upon
household and state to worship the gods. Here is to be
found the root of that sense of duty which marked the
Roman at his best; it often made him unexciting, but he
could become a martyr for an ideal. He did not argue
about what was honourable or just; his notions were
traditional and instinctive and they were held with an
almost religious tenacity.
The man offirm and righteous will,
No rabble clamorousfor the wrong,
No tyrant's brow, whose frown may kill,
Can shake the strength that makes him strong.
Thus, the Roman was hard.
Perhaps the conception which shows best the Roman
point of view is that of the ‘Genius’. The idea of the
genius begins from the paterfamilias who in begetting
children becomes the head of a family. His essential
character is isolated and given a separate spirit-existence; he carries on the family which owes to him its
continuance and looks to him for protection. Thus, as a
member in that mysterious sequence son-father-sonfather, the individual gains a new significance; he is set
against a background which, instead of being a continuous surface, is broken up, and the pieces are shaped,
and one ofthem is shaped like himself. His genius, therefore, is that which puts him in a special relationship to
19
20 THE ROMANS
hisfamily which went before him, and has perished, and
to his family which is yet to be born of his sons. A chain
ofmysterious power links the family from generation to
generation; it is because of his genius that he, a man of
flesh and blood, can be a link in that unseen chain.
Here we may recall the custom, indeed the right, by
which noble families set up in a recess ofthe central hall
of their houses, at first, wax-masks and, later, busts of
their ancestors who had deserved well oftheir family or
of the state. In the most solemn domestic rites of the
household these busts were made to associate. There
was no question of ancestor-worship or appeasement of
the departed; rather, it was a demonstration that they
and all for which they stood still lived on and that they
supplied the spiritual life to the family.
It is but a slight development of the genius to attribute to each man who is potentially a paterfamilias a
genius and to each woman a Juno; for this there was
Greek precedent. But the original idea of ‘Genius'1 was
capable of expansion. Just as the genius of a family expressed the unity and continuity underlying successive
generations, so genius was later made to belong to a
group ofmen unrelated by blood butjoined by common
interests and purposes through successive stages. The
group acquires an entity ofits own; the whole is more
than its parts, and that mysterious extra is the genius.
Thus in the early Empire we hear of the genius of a
legion; the officer of today will readily agree that the
‘traditions of the regiment’ feebly expresses what he
feels; genius is more personal. So, too, we find the
genius of a town, of a club, of a trading community.
We hear of the genius of branches of the civil service -
the mint and the customs, for example; it is natural to
compare our own ‘high traditions and ideals of the
service’. The Romans had an amazing power ofenvisagTHE ROMANS 21
ing the personality of a ‘corporation’; they were sensitive, we should say, to the spirit behind it, and that is
what they said quite literally when they spoke of a
genius. And it is not surprising that in Roman law the
law ol ‘corporations’ was carried to a high degree of
elaboration.
The power which has guided in the present will guide
in the future, and so the genius ofRome comes close to a
‘Providence’ protecting her, and to a mission which she
is fulfilling.
It is clear that in the household ofthe farmer the wife
occupies a position of authority and responsibility.
Among the Romans, theoretically she was under the
guardianship of her husband, and in law enjoyed no
rights. But she was not kept in seclusion, as in a Greek
household; she shared her husband’s life and set a standard of wifely and motherly virtues envied in a later
age. Parental authority was strict, not to say severe; and
parents received the respect of their children, whom
they took round with them in the several occupations
on the land or in the village or in the house. Education
was given by the parents, and was ‘practical’; even
the stories of the past were so framed as to point a
moral, and the Twelve Tables of Law were learnt by
heart.
Later ages looked back to the primitive simplicity of
early times, and no doubt idealised it. But it was not
myth; in the third and second century b.c. there was
literature which testified to it, for men then wrote who
had come in contact with men who had been thus
brought up. The ‘old ways’ survived as realities, and
still more as ideals. Ifwe enumerate some ofthe virtues
which Romans regarded as characteristically Roman
throughout their history, we must connect them with
the native endowment, the pursuits and manner of
22 THE ROMANS
life, the early struggles for survival, and the religion
ofthe first centuries ofthe Republic. They will be seen
to be all of a piece.
First in every catalogue of virtues comes some
recognition that a man should admit his subordination
to something external which has a ‘binding-power’
tipon him, and the term for this, religio, has a wide
application. For a ‘religious man’ the phrase is usually
‘a man of the highest pietas\ and pielas is part of that
subordination of which we have spoken. You are pius
to the gods If you admit their claims: you are pius to
your parents and elders, and children and friends, and
country and benefactors, and all that excites, or should
excite, your regard and perhaps affection, if you admit
their claims on you, and discharge your duty accordingly; the claims exist because the relationships are
sacred. The demands ofpietas and of officium (duty and
services, as in ‘tender offices’) constituted in themselves
a massive and unwritten code offeeling and behaviour
which was outside the law, and was so powerful as to
modify in practice the harsh rules ofprivate law, which
were only a last resort.
Gravitas means ‘a sense ofthe importance ofthe matters in hand’, a sense of responsibility and earnestness.
It is a term to apply at all levels — to a statesman or a
general as he shows appreciation of his responsibilities,
to a citizen as he casts his vote with consciousness ofits
importance, to a friend who gives his advice based on his
experience and on regard for your welfare; Propertius
uses it when assuring his mistress of‘the seriousness ofhis
intentions’. It is the opposite of levitas, a quality the
Romans despised, which meanstriflingwhen you should
be serious, flippancy, instability. Gravitas is often joined
with constantia, firmness of purpose, or with firmitas,
tenacity; it may be seasoned with comitas, which means
THE ROMANS
the relief given to over-seriousness by ease of manner,
good humour, and humour. Disciplim is the training
which produces steadiness of character; industria is hard
work; virtus is manliness and energy; dementia the
willingness to forgo one’s rights; fmgalitas, simple
tastes.
These are some of the qualities which Romans most
admired. They are moral qualities; they may even be
dull and unexciting. There is nothing among them to
suggest that intellectual power, or imaginativeness, or
sense of beauty, or versatility, or charm - that hardworked word nowadays - appealed to them as a high
ideal. The qualities which served the Roman in his early
struggles with Nature and with neighbours remained
for him the virtues above all others. To them he owed it
that his city-state had risen superior to the older
civilisation which surrounded it - a civilisation which
appeared to him to be limp and nerveless unlessstiffened
by the very virtues which he himself had painfully
cultivated. Perhaps they can be summed up under
severitas, which means being stern with oneself.
The manner oflife and the qualities ofcharacter here
described make up the mores maiorum, the manners of
one’s ancestors, which are among the most potent forces
in Roman history. In the broadest sense the phrase may
include the political constitution and the legal framework of the state, though generally such words as
instituta, institutions, and leges, laws, are added. In the
narrower sense the phrase means the outlook on life, the
moral qualities, together with the unwritten rules and
precedents of duty and behaviour, which combined to
form a massive tradition ofprinciple and usage. To this
tradition appeal was made when revolutionaries laid
violent hand on political practice, on religious custom,
or on standards of morality or taste. The constancy of
23
THE ROMANS
theology. But it is certain that with the associations and
habits which clustered round it its contribution to
Roman character was very great; by it, too, a mould was
fashioned in which later ages tended to cast the new and
formless mixture ofideas which reached them from the
older Mediterranean cultures. Great men were almost
canonised for their characters or for their achievements.
To the beliefs and manners of those days we must
ascribe that sense of subordination or obedience to
exterior power, whether a god, or a standard, or an
ideal, which in one form or another marked the Roman
to the end. To the same source must be traced the feeling for continuity which, while assimilating the new,
preserved the type and refused to break with the past;
for the future could be faced with greater security ifthe
value ofthe past were conserved. The early practice of
rite accompanied by formal invocations and crystallising into a ‘sacred law’ helped to develop that genius in
law which is Rome’s great legacy; and the law of the
state borrowed a reflected sanctity from its sacred
counterpart. Law presupposed obedience and was not
disappointed. The position of the head of the family,
the respect given to the mother, the training given to
the children, were confirmed and strengthened. The
validity of moral ideas was securely established, and
ties of natural affection and of service to friends and
dependants were made firm by a code of behaviour
which lay outside legal obligation and was of compelling power. The formal nature of religious observance
preserved Roman religion from the gross manifestations
ofOriental ecstasy, even ifitforbade warmth ofpersonal
feeling; and the attitude of toleration towards religion
which marked the republican and imperial ages originated, paradoxically, with a people who assigned the
utmost importance to state-religion.
25
THE ROMANS
a.d. 138-193, of which Mommsen, the great German
historian, said, ‘Ifan angel ofthe Lord should be minded
to compare the territory ruled by Severus Antoninus as
it was then and as it is now and to decide in which of
the two periods it was ruled with the greater intelligence and humanity, and whether, in general, morals
and happiness have improved or deteriorated since
those days, it is very doubtful whether the judgement
would be in favour ofthe present day.’ Our own Gibbon
had already said much the same.
Then came a century of confusion, till in a.d. 306
Constantine became Emperor, and Byzantium, renamed Constantinople, and now Istanbul, became in
a.d. 330 the capital of the eastern half of the Empire,
whence arose the East Roman Empire, heir alike ofthe
Greek and of the Roman tradition.
(b) FROM THE SEVEN HILLS TO
THE ROMAN ORB
... to sing a hymn to the gods with whom the Seven Hills havefoundfavour.
0 all-nurturing Sun, that with thy chariot offire bringestforth the day and
hidest it again and art born anew other andyet the same, may it never be thine to
behold aught greater than this city, Rome. Horace
Thou hast turned into one city what wasformerly the orb ofthe world.
RUTILIUS CLAUDIUS NAMATIANUS
Italy is a mountainous peninsula, with the ‘backbone’ ofthe Apennines lying' nearer to the eastern than
to the western coast and often reaching to the sea itself.
The harbours lie on the west and south. From Alps to
‘instep’ is about as far as fromJohn 0’ Groats to the Isle
ofWight, nearly 600 miles. The angle of the peninsula
is such that the heel is 300 miles further east than is the
north-east coast at Ravenna. From the heel to Greece
is some 50 miles, and from the west corner of Sicily to
Africa only 100 miles.
29
THE ROMANS
They were a pastoral folk. Their earliest festivals were
concerned with the interests of shepherds; milk, not
wine, is the earliest offering, and wealth was reckoned
in cattle; the very word for ‘money’, pecunia (whence
‘pecuniary’), means ‘head of cattle’. They found other
men of kindred race, Sabellian and Sabine, moving
upon the plain and settling upon the higher ground;
from the fusion of these settlements Rome took her
origin. From her central position her soldiers could
move north and east and south-along the valleys
north and east, and down the plain to the south; they
soon learned the value of ‘interior lines’. Indeed, some
have thought that the site ofRome was chosen from the
first as an outpost against the Etruscans to the north.
And here, for the moment, we leave the Romans, as they
join with outlying settlements, and turn to agricultural
pursuits and trade with Etruscan and Greek merchants.
To the north of the Tiber lay the Etruscan empire.
The Etruscans were probably sea-wanderers (from the
East?) settled at last in Etruria, or Tuscany - cruel,
overbearing, worshipping gloomy gods of the underworld and divining the future fromthe studyofthe organs
ofslaughtered animals. Theybuilt enormouslysolid walls
to defend their cities, and they traded with Greek cities
and with Carthage in Africa, and thus ‘borrowed’ from
civilisations superior to their own. From the sea they
penetrated into the Campanian plain, and in the seventh
century tried to move south to occupy it, circling round
the hills to the east to avoid the swamps, and seizing
some of the Latin towns on the high ground.
About the time of the Latin migration to the ‘Seven
Hills’, Greeks began their long process ofseizing the best
harbours on the south and west coasts of Italy and the
eastern side of Sicily; the Carthaginians, too, occupied
the western halfofthe island. At first the Greeks wanted
31
THE ROMANS
only trading stations, but in time colonies were sent
from Greece to establish citieswhich soon became among
the fairest of the Mediterranean. Perhaps the earliest
Greek settlement was Cumae, on the bay of Naples, in
the eighth century, and ofgreat moment to Europe; for
from the Greeks ofCumae the Latins learned the alphabet; the Etruscans too adapted the same letters to their
purpose, and passed them on to the inland tribes. From
Cumae, also, Italy may first have learned ofGreek gods,
such as Heracles and Apollo. But the chiefsettlements
ofthe Greeks were in the extreme south ofItaly and in
Sicily. Syracuse and Agrigentum in Sicily, and Tarentum, Sybaris, Croton, andRhegium in South Italy are all
Greek in origin. They are most important in Roman
history, for through them Rome came into full contact
with the Mediterranean world.
The Etruscans and the Greeks were the two most
powerful influences during Rome’s early years. The
rest ofItaly was sparsely inhabited by tribes, many akin
to the Latins. They lived in comparative isolation in
their hills, tending flocks and tilling the land and grouping together into settlements, as geography allowed, for
defence and trade and worship.
Now let us return to the Romans. The first three
kings were Latins, the last three were Etruscan. The last
ofthese was ejected by violence (traditionally 510 b.c.),
and the word ‘king’ became anathema to the Romans.
Yet the Etruscan influence remained. Temples and rites
survived; Jupiter was still enthroned on the Capitoline
Hill, Diana on the Aventine. The insignia of Etruscan
rulers became those of Roman magistrates, the ‘ivory
chair’, the bundles ofrods with two axes bound up with
them (fasces). But, more important, Rome acquired an
organisation which was to turn her into an imperial
power.
32 THE ROMANS
Till about 270 b.c. Rome fought perpetually for existence in Italy, and her fight could not cease till she was
recognised as a leading power. The highest qualities of
courage and resourcefulness were called for; one tribe
after another was overcome, and was incorporated on
varying terms into the Roman state or sphere ofinfluence. Leagues and alliances were created. At one crisis
-the sacking ofRome by roving Gauls in 390 b.c. -the
Latin cities failed to aid her; they suggested federation,
and Rome made up her mind that safety lay only in
their conquest. At great self-sacrifice she reduced them
to obedience, and then went forward as tribe after
tribe appealed to her for aid, and eventually for alliance
and the extension of her ‘rights’ to their cities. At last
Thurii, in the ‘instep’, appealed for aid against Tarentum. Rome hesitated - and agreed. Tarentum brought
in Pyrrhus, King of Epirus across the Adriatic; and
Rome emerged from his invasion of Italy the leader of
the Greek states in South Italy. Thus, she passed into
the sphere ofthe Carthaginians whose trade covered the
seas ofSicily and the Western Mediterranean. After half
a century ofstruggle (264-202 b.c.) it was decided that
Rome should become a ‘world power’, and that the
lands of the West should be ruled by an Aryan, not a
Semitic race.
Before the Punic wars are summarised (for the
Carthaginians were Phoenicians, in Latin Poeni, whence
Punicus), two observations must be made. ThoughRome
seems to be ceaselessly at war, she was at war because
ofthe force of events and the logic ofher own temperament. Round her were powers older, more experienced;
some were ambitious, and their neighbours were afraid:
threats to Rome’s allies were threats to her, and, speaking generally, she went to war to remove those threats.
After the struggle with Carthage she found herself
33
THE ROMANS
up provinces in the East, the civilisation and language
which she found there she left untouched to last for
centuries longer.
Firm action was to come in 64-62 b.c. In 88-84 B-cMithridates, King of Pontus, in concert with Tigranes,
King of Armenia, overran most of Asia Minor and
slaughtered thousands of Roman traders; the Pontic
fleet dominated the Aegean, and forces were landed and
welcomed at Athens. The Greek cities throughout
Greece threw in their lot with the invader, and the
whole of Greece appeared to be lost. But Sulla defeated
the Pontic armies in 86 and 85 b.c., cleared Greece, and
in the following year a Roman fleet under Lucullus
dominated the Hellespont. Ten years later Mithridates
again set the East ablaze. The campaigns of Lucullus
carried him very far east. But matters did not go well
for the Romans on the sea, for piracy flourished throughout the Mediterranean and Roman fleets were embarrassed for lack of regular supplies. Therefore, in 67
b.c., Pompey was appointed with extraordinary powers;
he suppressed piracy in an organised sweep starting
from Gibraltar, and he invaded Pontus and Armenia.
He invested Jerusalem, and for the first time Roman
power made contact with theJewish people; thus began
that troublesome problem. Pompey then ‘settled’ the
East; boundaries and governments, finance and commercial relations were re-ordered. The province of
Cilicia was enlarged, and Bithynia, Pontus, Syria and
Crete all became provinces; Cappadocia, Armenia and
many minor states were left as independent kingdoms.
The appointment ofPompey to that command, itshould
be noted, was the step which led to the fall of the
Republic.
It is time now to return to the West. Here we must
pass over wars in Spain and Africa and the suppression
39
THE ROMANS
of a slave revolt in Italy, and concentrate on four main
features: first, the safety ofthe western end ofthe Alps;
secondly, the relationship between Italy and Rome;
thirdly, the conquests and provincial policy ofJulius
Caesar; and fourthly, the problem ofthe eastern end of
the Alpine frontier.
The Alps might appear to be a natural protection of
impassable strength. Actually Hannibal, and later his
brother, had surmounted them. In the land to the north
and east great migrations of people had been going on
for some time; they were hard pressed towards the west
by other peoples in search of land. In 113 b.c. a large
host ofGermans, accompanied by other tribes who had
been caught up by them, appeared at the eastern end of
the Alps. They had already defeated one Roman army
in Illyria. They pushed their way westwards without
turning aside into Italy: and there was momentary
relief. But in 109 b.c. they appeared in Southern Gaul,
which thirteen years before Rome had annexed and
turned into a province. They carried all before them,
defeating two armies at Arausio (Orange). In three
years Marius trained the first professional Roman
Army, re-equipped and led it to defeat the most menacing of the tribes in Northern Italy and in Gaul. The
hordes passed further west, and a hideous danger was
over.
In 91 b.c. a danger no less serious threatened the City
ofRbme. The Italian allies rose in open revolt. For two
centuries they had borne the burdens and hazards of
war; they now desired the very incorporation in the
citizen body which earlier they had rejected in favour of
alliance. For, as we shall see, Roman citizenship was an
increasingly valuable possession. Yet, as it increased
in value, Rome granted it the more sparingly, the
citizens of the capital jealously guarded its extension,
40 THE ROMANS
and for years Italian resentment had smouldered. Their
rebellious manifesto proclaimed a new capital, called
Italica, at Corfinium, and the proposed constitution was
modelled closely upon the political traditions which its
would-be citizens were at the moment rejecting. Justification ofRome could go no further, though that does
not forgive her shortsightedness in refusing citizenship.
In a swift and resolute campaign the rebellion was
broken by Sulla, and a series of laws granted enfranchisement to all Italians. Italy ceased to be a confederr
acy. The city-state had had its day, and a new idea was
born. How it developed and what were its implications must be seen on a later page.
The third feature is the conquest of Gaul and its
organisation byJulius Caesar during the strenuous nine
years 58-49 b.c. ; his own account of his work is, of
course, the famous Caesar's Gallic War. When he
entered Gaul, his governorship covered a very small
Gallic province: when he left Gaul, the province
covered France and Belgium and he had ‘shown the
way’ to Britain. Italy’s frontier ofthe Western Alps was
now secure.
But, fourthly, the eastern end yet remained to be
closed, and it was not till Tiberius, who later became
Emperor, had undertaken long years offighting on the
Rhine and lower Danube that this quarter was secure;
the province of Raetia (Eastern Switzerland and the
Tyrol), Noricum (Austria) and Pannonia (Carinthia
and Western Hungary) eventually formed the northeastern bulwark.
Now comes the great turning-point in Roman
provincial policy. Augustus had intended to draw
the frontier at the Elbe, and so to include in the
Empire the German tribes who menaced Gaul and to
shorten the northern frontier. But in a.d. 9 a Roman
41
T.R.—2'
THE ROMANS
army of three legions was cut to pieces by Arminius
(Hermann) in the depths ofthe Teutoberg Forest near
Osnabruck: the xvn, xvm, xix legions never
again appeared in the army list. In the papers which
Augustus left at his death he advised no further extension ofthe Empire.
Yet the Empire was enlarged when necessity counselled it. To protect the Balkan peninsula the tracts
south of the lower Danube became in a.d. 46 the provinces of Thrace (Southern Bulgaria, Turkey and the
Greek coast at the head of the Aegean sea) and of
Moesia (Serbia, Northern Bulgaria, and the Dobruja).
The province of Britain was also added. In a.d. 107
Trajan created the province of Dacia (Rumania) as. a
bulwark to protect Moesia and added others in the East
which his successor surrendered. Thus by the end ofthe
second century the line ofthe ‘Roman Circle’ was drawn
- Rhine, Danube, Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, Egypt,
Africa, Spain, France, Britain - and Rome had 43 provinces to administer. In a.d. 270 Dacia was evacuated,
and Diocletian (a.d. 284-305) reorganised the whole
Empire, including Italy, into 120 administrative districts.
In the history of Rome’s imperial expansidh selfdefence must be accounted the first motive; but trade
inevitably followed and the first motive was mingled
with that of commercial exploitation; and in the second
century b.c. reasons ofsafety were sometimes alleged in
order to hide greed and ambition. The first two centuries a.d. were the age of assimilation, and thereafter
self-defence was again to the fore as the most urgent
consideration. Rome never fought to impose a political
idea or a religious creed; with unique generosity she
left local institutions and manners of thought and life
untouched. She fought to ‘impose the ways of peace’,
42 THE ROMANS
and by peace she meant the positive blessings ofsettled
order and security oflife and property with all that those
blessings imply.
43
(c) FROM CITY-STATE TO REPUBLIC IN RUINS
Cato used to say that our state excelled all others in its constitution; in them,for
the most part, an individual had established his ownform ofstate by his laws and
institutions . . our state, on the contrary, was the result not ofone man’s genius
but of many men’s, not of one man’s life but of several centuries and periods.
Genius had never been so profound as to enable any man at any time to overlook
nothing; nor, ifall genius were concentrated in one man, could he have suchforesight as to embrace everything at any one moment; actual experience stretching over
the ages is needed, cicero
It is due to our own moralfailure and not to any accident of chance that, while retaining the name, we have lost the reality of a republic. cicero
The sketch just given has described the growth of
Rome’s foreign power. We now turn to the government
ofthe city, ofItaly and the provinces, touching on social
matters only in so far as they cannot be avoided. We
shall catch a glimpse ofthe process by which the constitution developed and ofthe ways in which it was modified by the needs of governing overseas possessions.
We shall see the tentative methods by which Rome
first governed her possessions and the failure of those
methods; we shall then discover why the constitution
which she laboriously wrought broke down and how it
was replaced. In other words, we are concerned with the
process by which Rome turned from a city-state into an
Empire. In the story ofthis process certain elements will
for the most part run through from the beginning ofthe
Republic to its collapse. These elements are, for example, the Senate, the people, the magistracy, and its later
development the pro-magistracy. Roughly, the magistrates of various kinds and ranks are the executive; the
pro-magistrates are ex-magistrates appointed for special
THE ROMANS
posts outside Rome, as for example, governors of
provinces or specially appointed generals of armies.
Roman constitutional history is largely the slow change
in the duties and powers and functions of these elements, and in the relationship between them. If Polybius was right in saying that the Roman constitution
rested on a balance of power, the balance was maintained at different periods in different ways. Finally,
the crash came. And, when the Empire replaces the
Republic, we shall find the same elements furnishing
most of the material from which the edifice will be
built. The Romans preferred to tolerate apparent
anomalies and even absurdities, to rely on good sense
and understanding and restraint, to observe the spirit
instead ofthe letter, and to keep tried and familiar institutions. They preferred to do this rather than to press
matters to logical and unworkable conclusions or to
define closely in written articles of a constitution what
was best decided by compromise, or to set up new institutions born of the impulse ofthe moment. They were
happiest in adapting to new uses something already
wrapped round with tradition and sentiment and practice.
As a clue to the account which follows it might perhaps be useful to mark out in rough-and-ready fashion
the following phases. First, up to the Punic wars the
potentially autocratic powers of the magistrates were
gradually reduced by the opposition of the ‘people’ on
the one hand and the Senate on the other; further, the
‘people’, or the plebeian families, asserted itself in
opposition to the Senate, or the patrician families. In
the second phase, that of the Punic wars, the Senate
was supreme in fact, though not by right, and its
supremacy was justified; the magistracy was superior
to the pro-magistracy. In the third phase, the pro44
magistracy was the strongest power; the Senate was
almost impotent through lack of constitutional authority, the people attempted to reassert itselfwith justification in theory. But its opportunity was lost and its very
nature had changed; moreover, new factors were introduced - an influential business class and a new aristocracy more jealous of the privileges which it had once
attacked than was ever the old aristocracy. In the
fourth phase, the first Princeps (or Emperor) learnt the
lessons of three centuries of Roman constitutional history and built from the debris of the fallen Republic a
structure of government which lasted for two centuries
at least as a government still Roman in essentials.
We have referred already to some kind of ‘gathering
together’ or ‘dwelling together’ of little settlements of
various tribes to form the city of Rome. How it was
brought about and what were the causes and the contributions from the composing elements no one can say.
Tradition and reasonable deduction from survivals
suggest that this primitive association was loosely held
together by common interests symbolically expressed in
common ‘rites’ of religion, ‘communion in sacred
things’, communio sacrorum. The community was ruled by
a king, who was a patriarchal ruler, the elected officer
or magistrate and the priest of the whole people. One
of his most important duties was ‘to take the auspices’;
briefly, this means making sure that things were right
between the gods and the community. Apparently, a
new king was appointed by the heads of the leading
families (patres); the ‘sacred things’ were transferred to
him by the patres in whose keeping they were, and the
choice was confirmed by the community as a whole.
The king held supreme power (imperium), appointed
officials, dispensed justice, led in war, and ordered
religious worship.
THE ROMANS 45
THE ROMANS
The Senate was the council of the heads of leading
families; they were members for life and with them reposed in times of transition the ‘sacred things’. They
offered advice to the king only when consulted; they
proposed a new king, but could not appoint him unless
the whole people approved.
The people as a whole gathered only when summoned
to hear,pronouncements from the king, to take part in
religious rites and to witness certain acts, as, for example, disposal of property by will, which later fell under
the head ofprivate law. All our information about these
early times is very vague. Equally obscure are the
changes brought about by the Etruscan supremacy in
Rome. We hear of a new organisation of the whole
people on military lines, with the landholders and
wealthier citizens serving in the front ranks since they
could afford to arm themselves. But the autocratic rule
ofthe Etruscan kings brought about the ejection of the
alien dynasty, and the title ‘king’ was for ever accursed.
The power of the king passed to two magistrates
originally called ‘praetor-consuls’ (that is, ‘leaders’ who
are ‘colleagues’) and in time merely ‘consuls’; in times
of crisis supreme power was entrusted, though in fact
very rarely, to a ‘dictator’, who held it for a limited
period and for a specified purpose, the magistrates continuing in their own spheres on sufferance. And so
with the creation of consuls begins that curious principle of ‘collegiality’ which runs through the history of
the Roman magistracy - the principle of colleagues in
office who have the power of vetoing each others’ proposals ; positive action therefore depends upon colleagues
acting in concert. The change, however, made no
break in the chain; the consuls ‘took the omens’ and
held their power {imperium) in direet succession from
Romulus. The consuls held office for one year; they
46
THE ROMANS
constitution, patrician magistrates nominated patrician
successors for acceptance by the assembly, and themeasures submitted by patrician magistrates had to be
ratified by the patres. Discontent soon showed itself.
The plebeians took to holding meetings in a ‘Council of
the Plebs’ which was informal and outside the constitution. The main grievance was the unfettered power of
the consuls. The ensuing struggle can be sketched only
in essentials, but it is important to see that the plebeians
were concerned not with attack in order to obtain
privileges but with defending themselves. A promise
was made that no Roman citizen should be put to
death inside the city without appeal to the people; on
active service discipline might demand otherwise.
Delay brought about a threat by the plebeians, partly
carried out, to found a rival city. This move won from
the patricians, who needed man-power for the army, a
concession oftremendous importance. Plebeians should
have annual magistrates of their own, called ‘tribunes
of the people’, at first two, later ten. They were to be
elected by the ‘Council of the Plebs’, i.e. by plebeians
only. But the tribune, like the Council, was at first
strictly outside the constitution; he was given not
imperium but a special limited power (potestas) to aid
plebeians against individual acts of a patrician magistrate; his person was inviolate; he convened the ‘Council’ and invited it to pass resolutions. Later, as we shall
see, the tribuneship acquired far-reaching powers of
veto in the whole field ofgovernment; and still later the
tribunician power was an essential component of the
power of the Emperors.
Next came a demand to curtail the consul’s power by
law. It was countered by a promise to draw up and
publish a code of law. This is the celebrated Twelve
Tables, which probably went no further than expressing
48
THE ROMANS
requii ed no ratification by the patres. The struggle was
over, for the Council ofthe Plebs was now in theory the
‘sovereign’ power. The patrician families remained;
but if they still exercised power it was by prestige and
moral influence and not by law. The plebeians were
now the preponderant element in the state, both in
numbers and wealth. For the future, power theoretically
lay with them.
The tribunate remained, though it was now unnecessary, for its original purpose had been served. But it was
used to new and sinister purposes a hundred and fifty
years later as a weapon in a new struggle between a new
governing class, largely plebeian, and a new and less
worthy populace.
In 287 b.c. it seemed that all was ready for rule by the
people. But it was not to be. The Punic wars now broke
upon Rome; energy was necessarily deflected in directions other than political change. Whether, ifthere had
been a prolonged period of peace, the Senate would
have been denied its coming supremacy is doubtful; for
it was in a strong position and its leadership was powerful. But in any case two hundred years ofwar came, and
the experience and wisdom and steadfastness necessary
for the surmounting of times of strain and danger lay
with the Senate. Its moral supremacy produced its
supremacy in the whole conduct of affairs.
For by the time ofthe First Punic War its nature and
composition had changed since the early days of the
Republic. The task ofappointing to the Senate lay with
the consuls, as succeeding the king; the ‘collegiate’
principle secured some measure of responsible choice.
Later the task was transferred to the censor; for it was
clearly sensible that the consul should not appoint the
man whom, as a senator, he was later to consult. Soon,
by custom which hardened into a right, all ex-magis50
THE ROMANS 51
trates - and there were by now several grades ofelected
magistrates below that of consul - passed into the
Senate, and so by the avenue ofthe magistracy plebeians
passed into its ranks. The Senate, therefore, was largely
a body of men who had been elected to various magistracies by the people, with whom they naturally kept in
touch as they stood for office after office; when their
public service was over, they entered the deliberative
assembly to place their experience at the disposal ofthe
state. Thus the prospect of a permanent seat in the
Senate was opened out to the successful candidate to
annual office; and office became a means as well as an
end, and was therefore valued in rather a different way
than before, though the consulship was always an
honour coveted for its own sake. Thus there arose
a new rank or status, or, if the term is understood to
have nothing to do with birth, a new nobility - ofoffice.
Patrician birth was now only a matter of private pride;
the new ‘nobility’ carried public esteem and was proud,
often with the exclusiveness of the newly promoted, of
its responsibilities and position. Meantime, the magistracy became more closely attached to the Senate, for
the magistrate would one day take his place among
senators; he therefore consulted it with a new deference.
The exigencies of war pointed to the Senate as the
only directive power. The people was assembled with
difficulty, the Senate was at hand and was manageable
in size. Continuity of policy and swift decisions had to
be made ; treaties had to be drawn up and supplies
granted, often in a hurry. Experienced soldiers and
statesmen, with knowledge of‘foreign parts’, were in its
ranks. And so one precedent after another was established; the ‘opinion of the Senate’ now became ‘the
decree ofthe Senate’: as a body it ceased merely to discuss the problem submitted by the magistrate and now
THE ROMANS
initiated discussion, and so it gathered into its hands
practically all state business. Its conduct of affairs during the hardest years of war was in general excellent; if
later it fell from its high standard of efficiency and
d moral integrity, it was for reasons which we have
presently to consider.
Rome acquired her supremacy in Italy partly by war,
partly by taking full advantage of the disunity of the
various tribes and attaching them one by one to herself
in a loose confederation. By every means in her power
she secured that they should look to her for help and
advantage rather than to each other. Her near neighbours were incorporated as citizens into her body
politic; to others she extended a limited citizenship
which conferred rights of trade, together with enforcement of those rights at law, and freedom of intermarriage with Roman citizens. Others were bound by
various treaties of alliance, carrying duties and privileges but also independence to conduct internal affairs.
At a few points in Italy colonies of Roman citizens
were planted to guard coasts and roads: they were offshoots of Rome. Elsewhere ‘municipalities’, i.e. the
original towns, were granted full franchise: both these
communities had a generous degree ofself-government.
Appeal against local magistrates could be taken to
Rome. Prefects were sent out to try cases both in towns
and country districts; they represented the praetor at
Rome, who was the chiefjudicial magistrate.
But, when the lands beyond Italy were annexed,
different measures were called for. Atfirst, Rome was, in
general, reluctant to ‘create’ a ‘province’; she was content at first to disarm and tax, as e.g. Macedonia in 167
b.c. ‘Province’ implied annexation and annexation
implied a Roman governor. But after 146 b.c. she did
not hesitate. Sardinia and Sicily had been placed after
THE ROMANS
their conquest under a praetor. But the praetors were
needed at home. Therefore, after 146 b.c., a new device
was adopted, for which there was precedent. The
imperium of consuls had often been prolonged to deal
with a military emergency, and the holders ofthe command were then said to act pro consule, on behalf of the
existing consul. From 146 b.c. pro-consuls and propraetors were invested with full imperium and sent out to
govern the provinces. They were required to govern
within the ‘charter of the province’, a charter drawn
up by a senatorial commission which defined the status
of the various communities, fixed boundaries and rates
of taxation and methods of local government, and
sanctioned the use of local law. The charters were
drawn up in a generous spirit, partly because. Rome did
not want the burden of over-detailed administration,
partly because she was at heart generous. All depended
on the governor’s observance and interpretation of the
provisions ofthe charter and on his sense of honour; for
his opportunities for misgovernment and self-aggrandisement were vast, and he was with difficulty brought
to book. .
Now let us go back to Rome and sketch m the barest
outline the main features of the period of revolution,
the last too years or so of the Republic (to 31 b.c.).
The challenge to the constitution was made thirteen
years after the destruction of Carthage in 146 b.c. It
camefromthe tribunate, thenheld by 1 iberius Gracchus.
Measures to cure the depopulation of the countryside
and to arrest the decline of agriculture - both of them
evils due to war - were his programme. But for success
he needed more than one year, and he must perforce
nullify the veto of his colleagues in the tribunate whom
the Senate had brought over to its side. Both needs
could not be satisfied without a breach of usage. He
53
THE ROMANS
deposed his colleagues, and thereby gave his enemies
the chance ol denouncing him as the usurper of autocratic power. He fell a victim to the very violence to
which, so it was afterwards maintained, he had first
appealed. The lesson of his fate was noted by men who
came after him, for he had raised the question ‘where
lay the sovereignty?’ and had perished. So perished, too,
nine years later, his brother Gaius, who, beginning with
an attempt to widen the Senate by importing new blood,
ended by proposing to give some of its powers to the’
new class of influential business men and conciliating
the populace ofRome by selling corn at a cheap price.
He sought, too, to bring before a court other than the
Senate governors who misgoverned the provinces. For
two. years he was tribune, and he took his proposals
straight to the people whom at first he dominated as by
a spell; but he too was killed. Here was another lesson:
the people could be roused, and when roused might for
the moment achieve their purpose; but the tribunate,
with no military power behind it, was useless to maintain
those achievements against resistance.
The age that follows is the age of great individuals
seeking so to, alter the machine of government as to
adapt it to the new stresses, yet patiently preserving, as
far as they could, the old component parts. But impatience frequently prevailed, and impatience was
fanned to white heat by the personal rivalries which
followed upon the competitive claims to adjust the
government to satisfy ambition or the claims offaithful
armies. For amid the fierce passions loyalty to the state,
as it.was understood in the old days, wasforgotten; longservice and triumphant armies were now loyal to their
general,,who in turn was loyal to the claims ofhis army
for pensions, which meant land. The needs of the state
were of secondary importance; indeed, its only salva54 THE ROMANS 55
tion lay in the precarious alignment of the loyalty of
armies to generals and of generals to state. And, as the
government did not deserve loyalty and generals had
rival generals to consider, such alignment seldom
occurred.
The change in the attitude of the army was brought
about largely by Marius’ creation ofa professional longservice army, trained and equipped on new lines, to
meet the menace ofthe German tribes beyond the Alps.
Henceforth, the army,recruitedfromtheMediterranean,
looked to its general; gone for ever was the old Italian
army, composed largely of citizens. The new army was
a mighty weapon at all times, but in its early history it
was from the state’s point of view double-edged; it was
not till the time of Augustus that the right method of
handling it was found.
Sulla used it for two purposes; first, to defeat the
threat offoreign enemies and the menace ofthe Italian
allies; secondly, to enforce upon Rome what it had never
had before, namely a written constitution and the legal
recognition of the supremacy of the Senate. He then A;. , -
stepped into retirement to watch his constitution work.
But it was not now the same kind of Senate that
had justified its unofficial rule during the Punic wars.
It was now inefficient and self-seeking, intent upon
filling its pockets by the exploitation of the provinces.
The constitutional changes were soon abolished, though
much of Sulla’s judicial and administrative machinery
remained, as it deserved.
In 62 b.c. Pompey returned from the East where he
had wielded the power specially entrusted to him by
the Roman populace. He needed nothing but the ratification of his acts, ifhis work oforganisation there was
to be put on a lasting basis; he had foolishly (by the
standard of the time) disbanded his army. It was not
THE ROMANS
until Julius Caesar came to his aid and laid pressure
upon the government that his work was ratified. But
Caesar demanded his reward; Pompey was to see to it
that he was given a prolonged command in Gaul, so
that the consolidation ofthe frontier, begun by Marius
himself, could go ahead. For nine years Julius Caesar
stayed on this frontier; France and Belgium were added
to the Empire, and the first steps in their civilisation
were taken. It was the work of a military commander
and his army, not of the people and Senate of Rome.
Who, then, was entitled to the controlling hand in
government? Caesar answered the question in his own
favour, as had Sulla before him; but Sulla could rely
only on the support ofthe few, and Pompey had declined
to take the opportunity, though the lesson of the command entrusted to him was clear. It was Caesar who
realised that, though he might have to fight, he could
win if he could gain the sympathy of the majority by
his programme of intentions.
While he was in Gaul the Senate had watched his
growing power with alarm, and ceaseless manoeuvres
had been exercised to rob him of power. His agents,
tribunes loyal to him, his friends and all those who
owed or looked for wealth or advancement to him
defeated these manoeuvres. But towards the end the
Senate had won over Pompey, who now liked to take
up the role oftheir champion, and had placed an army
under his control. Caesar saw the point, and with his
army crossed the river Rubicon in the north of Italy,
and by that act declared dvil war.
In an incredibly short time he scattered the Pompeian
army, pursued part of it to Spain, and defeated the
rest in 48 b.c. His ‘clemency’ astounded the world.
For four years Caesar controlled the state, and in 44
b.c. he was murdered because he was setting himself as
56 THE ROMANS
‘king’ over the Republic. So Caius Gracchus had been
murdered some ninety years before. Of his legislation
we must here say nothing, except that he showed his
understanding of the need of a new policy towards the
provinces, and of widening the basis of government at
home and ofthe economic organisation ofItaly. But he
evolved no new constitution, no theory tojustify his own
power or to provide for his successor; and above all he
did little to win the imaginative sympathy of his time.
His great-nephew and adopted son, Octavianus, later
known as Augustus, had forty-five years of rule.
The political, social and economic problems in this
last century are of great interest, and the evidence for
part ofthem includes that fascinating study, the Letters
oTCicero. The chiefproblem, as is clear, is the weakness
of^tEe” central government to control the provincial
governors, who were in the provinces to execute the
wishes of the government at home. We have seen that
the principle ofshared power, or collegiality, weakened
thF magistrates, i.e. the executive, in relation to the
legislature. Now the provincial governor had imperium,
i.e. the same kind of power as the consuls at home, but
he was alone with no colleague; the only controls therefore were (a) annual office, (b) his neighbour with equal
power in an adjoining province, though this latter
might be rather a provocation than a check. But the
check of the short span of office was removed by the
people itself, who voted long terms to one general after
another, exalted them into great commanders-in-chief,
demanded their services as popular heroes on all
occasions, and weakened the only control yet left,
namely laws against misgovernment and prosecution
to enforce such laws. These were oflittle avail amid the
strife of parties and the people’s clamour in support of
its favourites, and the greed and ambition ofthe gover57
nors themselves. Here is to be found the cause ofthe fall
of the Republic. Not till the Empire was it discovered
(a) how to secure loyal governors, (b) that the true
Roman policy towards the provinces themselves was
not exploitation but local self-government in a Roman
loyalty. Other problems are of great interest, particularly the agrarian question - the condition of agriculture, the depopulation of the country and the drift to
the towns-and especiallytoRome,where an idle rabble
demanded even greater doles - the question of the reinstatement of the veterans, the failure of the soldier to
make a farmer, and the dearth of land. This last question touched keenly the Italian ‘allies’, and led to the
‘Allies War’ (see p. 40): for the Italian cared little about
voting, but he cared much about the fear of dispossession to make place for a time-expired soldier. Only
Roman citizenship could save him, and he fought and
won. Finally, there was the rapid growth ofwealth and
the equally rapid decay of old standards in public and
private conduct; and political life knew a corruption
from which it had been free.
The twelve years which followed saw the world
divided into parts organised one against the other by
rival generals and rival parties. The strife, which cost
thousands ofthe best lives ofthe time and left the West
exhausted, was ended by the battle ofActium in 31 b.c.,
when Octavianus finally defeated Marcus Antonius and
Cleopatra. At last came the era of peace and order for
which the people had yearned for centuries. We shall
see later, first, why the battle ofActium was one ofthe
great turning-points in history; secondly, what use
Octavianus, whom we shall hereafter call Augustus,
made of his long reign.
58 THE ROMANS
CHAPTER III
(a) THE NEW WAYS AND THE OLD
What remains ofthe old ways in which Emins said the Roman state stood rooted?
CICERO
How did it come about that the old Roman ways
ceased to maintain their hold?
The new ways were, of course, due to the influence of
Greek habits of thought and life; and it is important
that by ‘Greek’ we should understand not the supreme
expression ofthe Hellenic genius as given in four or five
of the great authors of the fifth and fourth centuries
b.c., but the culture which was spread over the Eastern
Mediterranean, and which itselflooked back to the great
age of Athens for most of its inspiration. In many respects it had seized upon the least important aspects
because it was incapable of living up to any great
moment; it had debased Greek language, Greek literature and Greek character. The Greek masterpieces were
available for reading and were read by many; but the
Greek men whom the Romans now began to meet in
daily life were not always as the fifth-century Athenians.
Though the Romans employed the artistic and professional skill of the ‘Greelding’, on the whole they despised him for his character; and they despised him the
more because he had not lived up to his former greatness.
In considering the relation of one culture to another,
we cannot avoid metaphors, dangerous as they are.
‘Influence’, of course, means ‘flowing in’; but the new
ideas were deliberately imported by Roman minds
attracted to them! We sometimes speak of a man
THE ROMANS
the Roman spirit preserved its individuality, its genius;
Greco-Roman civilisation thus became the root of
European civilisation.
The old and the new points of view are perhaps best
seen in particular men. P. Cornelius Scipio, surnamed
Africanus, may be taken as exemplifying the new type of
Roman, Marcus Porcius Cato as embodying the old
type, and Scipio Aemilianus, who was adopted from
the Aemilian family by the son of Scipio Africanus, as
the forerunner ofmany who attempted to reconcile the
old and the new ways.
The Cornelian family had already given men ofnote
to the service ofthe state. When at a time of crisis in the
Second Punic War the assembly of the people looked
for a bold leader capable ofending the intolerable strain,
and, when men of experience hesitated in face of the
awful hazards, Scipio Africanus, aged twenty-four, confidently offered himself. He was given the task and he
succeeded. Elis whole life was of a piece with that act.
From that time he dramatised himself; he loved the
spectacular and invested himselfwith a religious aura as
though he were the favourite ofdivine will. In Spain he
was dazzlingly successful; his magnanimity attached
the tribes to him; they offered him the crown, for they
said he was god-like, and when he refused they furnished him with troops. In Africa he won over by sheer
charm kings who were neighbours of Carthage, and
Rome wondered whether such familiarity with foreign
potentates was altogether right. Story made him stay
as Hasdrubal’s guest, or discuss with the exiled Plannibal the relative merits of each other in comparison with
Alexander. At home he brushed aside custom and law,
standing for offices before he was qualified by age, and
receiving encouragement from an admiring people. He
affected; he grand manner and studied every action;
6l
THE ROMANS
even at the end, when in semi-exile he lay dying, he
‘refused his body to an ungrateful country’. Hitherto
the great men of Rome had been such as Gincinnatus,
who left his plough to serve the state in time of crisis,
and returned to it when his work was done. In Scipio
the Roman people were offered a new kind of hero - a
hero who asserted individuality in defiance oftradition,
who based leadership on power ofpersonality, and made
a romantic appeal to the imagination now awakening
in the ordinary Roman. How did such a type of hero
arise?
It arose -ifwe continue to illustrate ‘movements’ and
‘influences’ by men - when Livius Andronicus, a Greek
slave captured atTarentum, composed as a reading-book
for his master’s children a metrical Latin version of
Homer’s Odyssey. The work passed beyond its original
intention fliere was a new literature; stories of heroes
who were at once godlike and human. No longer the
statuesque forbidding heroes of early Rome, slaves of
duty, but warm-blooded and erring and lively and full
of zest. And what leaders of men, swaying multitudes
by their word and guiding by their wise counsel the
future of city and army! After Homer, Greek comedies
were translated and were combined with native Italian
farces and burlesques, and Roman comedy arose.
Moreover, once the heroes of Homer - Agamemnon,
Odysseus and the rest - had been treated, there was no
reason why Roman subjects should not be chosen, and
Naevius, of Campania, wrote an epic ofthe First Punic
War, combining Greek and Italian legend and motif.
Ennius followed with an epic in hexameters which
included the Second PunicWar; the Iliad was his model,
but his own strong Roman character shines through;
and in his tragedies, though they owe much to the Greek
tragedian Euripides, the moralising and philosophical
62
/
discussion is Roman. And the achievements ofAlexander and the legends clustering round his name made
their appeal to the imagination of men like Scipio and
stimulated them to dreams ofsimilar exploits.
The rise of this literature and the performances of
tragedies and comedies brought before the Roman
public new types of human character, isolating the
individual and drawing attention to special features.
The opportunities for men ofstrong character to influence the life ofsociety and of the state was revealed to
the intelligent; the new knowledge of Greek legend and
history showed that it had been done; there was no reason why it should not be done in Rome, and arguments
could be drawn from Greek philosophy to justify it.
The new ideas of Greek thought spread with the Greek
language, and a lively and imaginative mind like the
mind of Scipio Africanus grasped their implications
and created for himself a role as a Roman leader of a
new type.
M. Porcius Cato was born in 234 b.c. and was
brought up on his father’s Sabine -farm, which he inherited. At the age of twenty he distinguished himself
fighting under Q. Fabius Maximus against Hannibal,
and served to the end ofthe war. At the age ofthirty he
was quaestor to Scipio in Sicily, and was with him in
Africa; in 198 b.c. he was praetor of Sardinia, three
years later he was consul, and in 184 b.c. he was censor.
He was soldier, lawyer, statesman, farmer, writer, but
above all a ‘character’.
As a young farmer he took up the cause of his neighbours in local law-courts, for he was a good speaker
ready to champion the right. A friend advised him, in
spite ofhis plebeian birth, to seek a larger sphere for his
energy and gifts in Rome itself, whither he went. Till
the day of his death at the age of eighty-five he was
THE ROMANS 63
THE ROMANS
engaged in ceaseless labour, laying about him in lawcourt or senate-house or published work with the same
lusty vigour and ruthless courage with which he had
engaged in combat on the battle-fields; of this conflict
his fame and his body alike bore many scars. At home
his life was of the simplest, for he trained himself in
austerity; as a general he remained the soldier of the
ranks, marching on foot and carrying his own arms. As
a provincial administrator, he was inexorable and was
proud ofit; he cut down expenses in the interest ofthe
governed, and scrutinised every item charged to the
home government, ‘which under his administration
never seemed more terrible nor yet more mild’. He beat
down contracts for public works, and raised them for
the farming oftaxes. Once he suspected an enemy or a
friend of dishonourable conduct, he ‘never shrank from
a quarrel on behalfofthe commonwealth’. His speeches
were famous; Cicero, who had read over a hundred and
fifty of them, says ‘they show all the qualities of great
oratory’. Their pungent aphorisms became proverbial;
their skill was a model, for he knew all the tricks. His
son he educated himself, composing for him text-books
of grammar, law and history; for he would not let him
owe ‘so great a thing as his learning’ to anyone else. He
taught him to ride and box and fight and swim and
farm. No doubt he was an exacting father; but ‘a man
who beat his wife or child’, he thought, ‘laid hands on
what was most sacred’, and a,good husband he thought
‘worthy of more praise than a great senator’ - his
highest praise. As censor he carried one ordinance after
another to check, by high taxation or sheer prohibition,
the luxury encouraged by the flow ofwealth into Rome.
His influence was amazing; his counsel was sought on
all things, for, says Livy, though he was so ‘all-round’,
you would have thought him born to do the very thing
64 THE ROMANS
to which he was laying his hand. Not even old age broke
his vigour of mind and body; towards the end of his
course he showed the same ardour ‘with which many
approach the beginning, when their fame is yet to
make’: though he had achieved fame, he did not relinquish his labours.
This was the man who fought Hellenistic influence in
Rome, and naturally lost - though a name which
becomes a rallying cry for centuries has not altogether
: ost. It is easy to caricature Cato, for he lends himselfto
it; and there are many traits in his character which
repel us. His treatment of his slaves was inhuman; he
gloried in his asceticism; he seemed to deny pleasure to
others and therein to gain his own twisted pleasure.
He may be called narrow, uncompromising, insensitive, vain, sanctimonious; ostentatiously priggish, if it
were not for his humour, self-righteous, if he were not
fighting for an ideal. He may have cast himself for a
part, and overacted, but his sincerity remains. It is also
easy to misinterpret his opposition to the fashionable
cult ofthings Greek; there is something to be said on his
side. He knew Greek all his public life, for Greek was
necessary to any statesman who had dealings with the
East. He knew well the works of Greek orators and
historians; he took a Greek translation of a Carthaginian work as his model in his book on agriculture. He
tells his son to look at Greek literature, but not to lay it
to heart, for they are ‘a scoundrel and incorrigible race’.
It is not intellect which Cato despises, but the contemporary use ofintellect to undermine character. His ideal
is the citizen of high moral principle, based on tradition, realising himself in the commonwealth and its
business, and so creating a triumphant government preeminent for enlightened policy and massive integrity.
The Greeks whom he came across were politically dead;
T.R. - 3
65
THE ROMANS
yet they came to Rome and talked and talked. When
Carneades and Diogenes, philosophers both, were in
Rome, they made a great stir by their lectures, ‘it was
like a great wind sounding round about the city’: anc
Cato was afraid. For in his view Greek oratory had
nothing to say, and many words with which to say it:
his own definition ofan orator was vir boms dicendiperitus,
a man of high character who can make a good speech.
The sophists of Socrates’ day had boasted their skill to
make the worse appear the better cause, and the Greeks
of the third and second centuries were their heirs. The
self-assertion of individual personality, such as Scipio
loved, was the reverse of Cato’s ideal - action, in the
midst of a community, inspired by a moral motive
personal influence and charm were dangerous, thought
Cato, and went to the other extreme. The modern selfculture led to self-indulgence in the name of art and
learning and fashion. The springs of action as discovered by ‘the noblest Romans’ were dried up at their
source; for Cato all true knowledge issued in action,
and action revealed the man. Introspective absorption
in self and its culture meant the collapse of a common
morality; and then would emerge the ‘leader’, casting
his spell by cleverness of word and promise over a
characterless people.
It is possible that the best statement ofCato’s motives
is given by a Greek who lived a hundred and fifty years
before him, namely Aristotle. In that mine of political
wisdom, the Politics, he says that the greatest contribution to the stability of a constitution is made by ‘education’ or training for the constitution, though ‘nowadays
everyone despises it’ (and Aristotle had witnessed the
decline of the city-state). Laws, he says, are of no use
unless the members of a state are trained and educated
in the constitution. But such training is training not
66 THE ROMANS
with a view to actions which will please the government,
oligarchy or democracy, but with a view to actions on
which oligarchy or democracy will be able to base their
own particular constitutions. Young oligarchsshould not
be trained to luxury, nor democrats to the belief that
freedom is doing what you please. ‘A man should not
think it slavery to live according to the constitution; he
should think of it rather as his salvation.’
The Roman constitution was an oligarchy and it was
based on law and custom: the sons ofthe oligarchy were
multiplying their luxuries: the cult of the individual’s
tastes and caprices in indifference to all else was being
interpreted as freedom: the laws and the unwritten
codes were becoming of less use. Cato trained himself
and wanted others to train themselves, and the best
school was the Roman school.
When Scipio was publicly charged with malversation
of public funds in his campaigns, he invited the people
to go with him there and then to the temples to render
thanks for his victories; for it was the anniversary ofthe
battle of Zama. He was triumphant - on personal
influence and popular sentimentalism. No wonder Cato
was afraid.
Scipio was eventually found guilty, but none dared
arrest him, and he died in semi-exile. Cato survived
him; but, as he himself said, it is not easy to have to
render an account ofyour life to an age other than the
age in which you have lived.
Cato could not win; the Roman city-state was passing
away. The wealth of the world, and Asiatic notions of
the use of wealth, were entering Rome.
The ideal of Scipio Africanus and the ideal of Cato
stood in open contrast. When Cato was an old man and
Scipio already dead, an attempt at a reconciliation of
the two ideals was made by Scipio Aemilianus, son of
67
THE ROMANS
by example. He was anxious to prevent further expansion of the Empire; he imposed discipline upon the
army; he refused to court the Roman populace whom
he frequently angered, and he boldly maintained that
iberius Gracchus had been rightly slain. ‘So perish all
who do the like again’ - another Homeric line. Scipio
in his turn was murdered, says Cicero, by his political
enemies, in 129 b.c.
Here, then, was an attempt to combine new ideas and
old principles. It failed, as it was bound to fail, before
the seductions of wealth and power. Noble families fell
from their honourable traditions; the new populace of
Rome and the great cities within the Empire exerted
their growing strength to secure ends that were no less
selfish than those of the governing class and probably
not as enlightened. But the antithesis ofthe Roman spirit
and the surrounding culture continued; there were to
be many Catos and many Scipios of both types, though
of less heroic stature, in Roman history. In spite of
everything, the Roman spirit broke through all that
threatened to submerge it.
69
{b) CICERO
The race ofmen shall, perishfrom the earth before the glory ofCicero shall perish
from their memories. Velleius Paterculus
Cicero stands near the end of the age of conflict
and disruption. From his pages we can reconstruct
much ofthe story ofhis time, as seen from the viewpoint
ofa member ofthe aristocracy. He was born in 106 B.c.
and was put to death by Antony a year after the murder
ofJulius Caesar in 44 b.c. His extant works take up
eighteen volumes in a small pocket edition published in
1823: three volumes of‘rhetorical’ treatises (or literary
criticism and ‘education’), six volumes of speeches
written to be delivered in Senate or law-court, four of
letters, four of philosophical works and one of fragments. In all these pages there is little that tells us of
the manner of life led by the majority; in Latin literature, as in Greek, the outlook is that ofthe few. In Rome
the government was in the hands of an oligarchy drawn
from families ennobled by service to the state and counting among its numbers the most highly cultivated men
of the day. In the writings of Cicero the strength and
the weaknesses, the blind selfishness, the massive culture, and the corruption of public and private integrity
stand out clearly. He was a ‘new man’, that is, he did
not belong to one of the old families; he came from
Arpinum, and like many before him he had migrated
to Rome to stand for office as the preliminary to a public
career. He was eminently successful, and after his
famous consulship in 63 b.c. had held a short and inconspicuous term of office as proconsul in Cilicia. In
senatorial circles - for, of course, he was a senator - he
moved freely, for he was a leading advocate, politician
and man ofletters. Occasionally a slight trace ofsocial
uneasiness can be detected. He loved Rome and was
miserable when away from it. To him and to his circle
the only work which counted as work was in the service
ofthe state (negotium) ; all else, no matter how urgent or
exacting, was ‘time off’, even though it might include a
man’s main livelihood. For this class land was the only'
worthy occupation; trade and industry were not
acceptable pursuits. It was not that these men were
above money; money was their curse, and some of the
largest fortunes of history were gathered into the hands
of men like Lucullus and Crassus, and were often expended on luxuries wicked and futile; moreover, towards the end ofthe Republic senators evaded the rules
forbidding them to have interests in trade and industry
70 THE ROMANS THE ROMANS
and transacted business of all kinds through intermediaries. What they disliked was retail trade and the
routine of manufacture. But they were on close terms
with contractors and producers ‘in a big way’ and with
financiers and bankers; and they readily sold their
estates and country houses and bought others, and
speculated in the land and ‘house-property’ markets.
These men ofsenatorial rank moved about Rome and
Italy and the provinces as though they were a race
apart. Their pride in Rome was intense; their appreciation of themselves could scarcely fall far behind. To
them Rome was the capital ofthe world, and they knew
it, as others did not. They had started their careers with
military service, and they had held offices in Rome and
had then gone out to govern provinces. Royal houses
had received them, men of letters and distinction had
conversed with them; councils and assemblies had
decreed them honours and privileges, even offering to
them the religious veneration accorded to their own
kings and heroes. The tide ofwar had fallen back before
them and before the majesty ofRome, and their power
of organisation had brought order out of chaos. The
might and the prestige ofRome were due to their forefathers who had flung an empire from west to east and
north to south, and they were the guardians. That they
were sometimes disloyal to the highest traditions and
often enriched themselves unscrupulously was true
enough. Their heads were turned not so much by power
as by wealth. All the same, many did realise the weighty
obligations of the Imperium Romanum, and they realised
them with Roman gravitas. They were a race apart, for,
even ifthey had not found the right method, they were
in fact conscious ofdoing a work for which they were set
apart. Had not three hundred and six men from the
Fabian family perished in the service of the state in
71
THE ROMANS
477 b.c.3 and had not the fortunes of the family hung
upon one young boy? Other families could show comparable records.
Below this ‘order’ was the order of the ‘knights’
(eqyites). In the early days of Rome, when the duty of
military service carried with it the duty of providing
arms and accoutrements appropriate to wealth, the
citizens were classified according to property. Those
with a particular assessment were required to bring
a horse with them to war and tojoin a cavalry squadron
- in fact, to become a knight. This title survived long
after recruitment was on another basis, and it denoted
eventually men who possessed a property qualification
of400,000 sesterces (about £12,000 today). By Cicero’s
time the ‘knights’ were a powerful class; they were free
from the inhibitions about business which hampered
the senator and free from some of his sense of honour;
their interests were in state contracts, in the commercial
expansion or development or exploitation of the provinces. Cicero’s great friend Atticus, with whom he
corresponded for many years (the letters are still
extant), was a knight, and he was a cultivated man of
literary and philosophical interests, rich and unostentatious, who had far more leisure time on his hands than
Cicero or members ofthe Senate. Since about 130 b.c.
equestrian influence in the state and in politics had
grown enormously; knights were a recognised ‘order’
with certain privileges and duties and prestige. To the
knights the traditional aspects of Roman power probably appealed little; they were interested in stability,
and the first Emperor relied on the order very greatly
when he built up his new ‘imperial civil service’.
At Rome the rest of the total population of perhaps
three-quarters ofa million was made up ofshop-keepers,
artisans and ‘small men’ pursuing a great number of
72
THE ROMANS 73
occupations, together with many thousands who were
always in a state of semi-idleness because there was
nothing urgent. A great proportion was offoreign birth,
for Rome attracted men and women from all countries;
and freed slaves swelled the populace. These freedmen
were a growing class whose influence was increasing.
There were also the slaves. Rome harboured all nationalities, and more were yet to come within the next century; but already by the time ofCicero there were very
many - Greeks and Syrians and Egyptians and Jews
and Germans and Africans. Ofcourse, not all these had
the citizenship.
These were the classes - Senate, knights, people -
whom it was Cicero’s ambition to unite in order to
promote some kind ofsocial stability after a century of
strife. He realised that in all quarters of the state there
were men who were ‘sound at heart’; he felt that, if
they could be brought together, they could create a
healthy public opinion which would be proof against
irresponsible revolutionaries on the one side and the
‘leadership’ ofone man which could develop into autocracy. He called his ideal the ‘united front’ of sound
elements, the concordia ordinum. He realised, as some of
his writings show, the need ofsome kind ofleadership,
but his difficulty was to find the right name and the
right role and still more to imagine to himselfthe right
man. His last philosophical work was the De qfficiis,
written after the murder of Caesar - a work which for
centuries was read by every educated man in Europe
and now is scarcely read at all. It contains Cicero’s last
musings upon life and politics and human behaviour,
and it is crammed full of a wisdom embodying a political experience such as no Greek had ever passed
through; its influence on European thought has been
profound. It probably cost its author his life, for it made
T.R.—3
CHAPTER IV
{a) RESTORATION AND THE AUGUSTAN
principate: VERGIL and horAce AND LIVY
In my sixth and seventh consulship, after I had put out the flames of civil war
and by universal consent had become possessed of the control of affairs, I transferred the statefrom my own power to the will ofthe Senate andpeople ofRome.
For this service Ireceived by decree ofthe Senate the name ofAugustus.
From Augustus’ own account of his Principate
To explain in a few words the significance ofthe battle
ofActium which gave Augustus final victory is difficult.
Hellenistic civilisation, it will be remembered, was an
amalgam of Greek and Oriental ideas fused together
and spread over the East, especially by the work of
Alexander the Great and his successors. For centuries
this civilisation had attracted able Romans, and its
influence on thought, religion, morals and the material
equipment ofsociety at all levels was great. It had a long
past and it enshrined the massive achievements of centuries of experience, But alongside this vast tradition,
unnoticed for centuries but at last compelling notice, a
new and tentative approach to the problem of human
life - the organisation ofsociety, conduct collective and
individual, ideals of character and behaviour, statecraft and government, ethics and religion - had painfully been worked out till it had gained confidence in
itself and had proved its worth in competition with
other views upon the same problems. This was the
Roman experience, expressed in institutions and standards and ideals. True, the last century had seen the
betrayal of all these. But not a final or a whole-hearted
betrayal - rather an eclipse due to defect of machinery
for the expression of the true instincts of the solid mass
of people. The tributary of Roman experience, feeding
the river ofMediterranean culture, was thin in volume
compared with the.Hellenistic river in its deep-cut bed.
But was it of no value? And was it to be lost?
Cleopatra, unlike the modern popular version of her,
was of Macedonian and Greek descent, powerful of
intellect, a linguist herself able to conduct affairs with
foreigners, a student ofliterature and philosophy, hardheaded in administration, masterful of will and ruthless in carrying it out, not obsessed by the passion oflove,
which she used as a means, but dominated by the
passion for power with which she hoped to achieve her
ideal. Alone of the successors of Alexander she dreamt
his dream of the fusion of East and West and of the
unity of mankind. Her audacious plan was to use a
Roman army to subjugate Rome and then, as Empress,
divine and supreme, to rule the world; the measure of
her influence and her ability can be gauged by estimating the skill and the propaganda needed to persuade to
her cause generals of ancient tradition and legionaries
ofWestern origin. The party of Octavianus, to enflame
the hatred of the West, might paint her as an Egyptian
tyrant, divine embodiment of the animal gods of the
Nile, and sunk in every Oriental depravity; but its
leaders knew the truth, and did not underrate her.
Romans might sometimes hate their enemies; but a
special hatred inspires them when they speak ofHannibal and of Cleopatra, a hatred not untinged by fear;
and it is fear of something alien, something not
Western.
Octavianus, now Caesar Augustus, strove by every
measure, direct and indirect, to ensure that the Roman
tradition should triumph. He dammed up the flood of
Hellenistic influence, and opened every gate which
THE ROMANS 8l
THE ROMANS
would admit the Roman genius and its accumulated
experience. He rebuilt the temples, he restored standards in morals and conduct, he set a new fashion of
work and devotion to duty. He left his mark on every
branch of administration; his praise encouraged poets
and historians to spread abroad the old Roman ideals
and pride in them, his good sense attached to him the
middle classes of Italy, still sound at heart, and recruited from them honest administrators and provincial
governors. His efforts in large measure succeeded
because men wished them to succeed. Eventually they
contributed to bring about the unity of mankind - as
far as it then could be - from the West by means of
Western ideas of human personality and ordered freedom; and those ideas were not conspicuous in the past
history of the East.
Augustus moved tentatively towards the constitutional establishment of his power, learning from the
fate of Julius Caesar the danger of asserting it too
precipitately. Finally, he based it on a combination of
the proconsular imperium, the ‘tribunician power’ without the office, and certain privileges which were
accorded to him by vote of the people. The proconsular imperium gave him command of all the armies,
which were now stationed in the provinces on the frontiers; these provinces were governed by nominees ofhis
own; the rest he left to the Senate to administer. The
‘tribunician power’ gave his person ‘sacrosanctity’ and
his position the appearance of being representative of
the people, besides the right of proposing legislation.
The special privileges gave him, among other rights, the
power of ‘commending’ candidates at elections. He
was chief ofthe pontifices, the college of priests, and held
many positions of religious significance. He called
himself Princeps or ‘first citizen’, and Pater Patriae,
82
THE ROMANS
‘father of his country’. The consulship he left intact.
Routine administration, now thoroughly overhauled
and made more efficient by the organisation of one
‘department’ after another, he divided between the
Senate and his own civil service, which he built up
largely from the middle-class Italians. Thus, he rebuilt
the state, using the materials of the Republic, and
claimed, with ample justice in theory, that he had
‘restored the Republic’, while he excelled others only in
‘authority’ (auctoritas), a word with a long and honoured
Republican tradition. From the division of function
between Princeps and Senate (for it was this rather than
a division ofpower) the new government has since been
defined as a ‘diarchy’ rather than a monarchy; whether
it remained so depended, as was to be seen, on the
character ofthe Princeps. But, whatever that character
might be, in theory the constitution remained established throughout the period of the Empire on the
general lines laid down by Augustus. The Princeps was
sincere in his wish that all the elements which he
enlisted in the service of the state should function well,
and, if well, independently of interference by the
Princeps.
Such reconstruction succeeded in its immediate and
ultimate results because it was accompanied by a
restoration of public confidence. The very thing upon
which Cicero so longed in vain to base the Republic was
established by the end ofAugustus’ long Principate. It
was established partly because it was already there,
though not in the quarters in which Cicero looked for it,
partly because ofthe creative efforts of a Princeps with
a superb eye for opportunity and with an insight into
the underlying sentiments of the age. This basis was a
strong public opinion confident ofitself; and Augustus
was persuaded that in the Italian people there resided
83
THE ROMANS 85
Vergil, tried to achieve similar results through the
special medium of the statesman, legislation.
Unfortunately, the greatness ofHorace and Vergil as
the interpreters of the spirit of the time, which was
partly old and partly new, is apparent only after deep
study ofthem. But, if anyone wishes to understand their
prophetic message, let him study the Carmen Saeculare
of Horace or the Sixth Book ofthe Aeneid, or the fourth
Eclogue or the sculpture of the Altar of Peace, erected
in 9 b.c., in the company of a guide who can explain
their full religious significance. Here all that can be
said is that the great ‘Secular Hymn’ ofHorace was composed to be sung by a choir of boys and girls moving in
procession to the temple ofJupiter on the Palatine Hill.
It summed up in symbolic form, which trailed manifold associations, the meaning of the ‘secular festival’.
This festival, decreed by Augustus in 17 b.c. after an
interval of 129 years, opened the new age in the spirit of
creative hope, not, as formerly, in the spirit ofsadness
and contrition in which the previous cycle was buried;
the new age opened with vows of new devotion to the
service of the gods and with prayers for blessings upon
men. Girls and boys - that is, those who were to build
the new edifice -sang this hymn ofthe rededication of
a people. For, ifthe Roman character has been successfully sketched in the foregoing pages, it will readily
be understood that, when the Roman felt sincerely
about things of morality or sentiment or value, he
expressed them in the language of religion. Opinion
may differ now whether he was right or wrong; but
there is no logic in arguing that, because his notion of
religion was not ours, therefore his sincerity is to be
doubted.
Here is a passage from the hymn, though it is almost
sacrilege to detach it from its context:
86 THE ROMANS
‘As surely as Rome, O ye gods, is your handiwork, as
surely as from Troy came those armed warriors who
settled on the Tuscan shore - a mere remnant bidden
to win a new home and a new city, their journey
finished under your guidance, a remnant which purehearted Aeneas, saved unhurt from blazing Troy to
survive his country, led as by a free highway to a destiny
greater than all that they left behind - so, O gods, to
our youth swift to learn grant ways of righteousness,
grant to old age calm and rest, to the race of Romulus
wealth and increase ofits sons, O grant all that is glorious ... Already Good Faith and Peace and Honour and
the Modesty of olden days and Virtue so long slighted
muster courage to return, and Plenty with all the riches
of its full horn is here for all to see. Phoebus with his
trappings ofsilver bow, who foresees the future, who is
welcome friend of the nine Muses of Rome, who with
health-giving skill gives new strength to tired limbs -
Phoebus assuredly beholds with just and kindly eyes
these towered hills ofRome and prolongs Rome’s greatness and the prosperity ofLatium into yet another cycle
and into ages that ever shall grow better.’
The Aeneid of Vergil was a national and religious
epic. It was epic, for it narrated in verse the doings of
Aeneas and his band of followers in their pilgrimage
from Troy to the Western world in the high enterprise
imposed upon them by a divine will which had its own
plans for the destiny ofthe world. It was national, for it
asserted the independence ofthe Roman spirit from the
spirit of Greece and maintained the individual character of Roman achievement. It was religious, for it expressed in religious phrase the philosophy ofthe Roman
mind, fusing the ideal characters of Regulus and Cato
and the rest with the philosophical outlook of Cicero,
THE ROMANS
and producing a Roman humanism. The most significant movement of history, therefore, according to
Vergil, is the march ofthe Roman along the road of his
destiny to a high civilisation; for in that destiny is to be
found the valid and permanent interpretation of all
movement and all development. As the Roman alone
of all nations had succeeded under divine guidance, so
in the future success for him alone was assured ifhe rose
to his high calling. The stately*movement of the Aeneid
progresses throughout its length to this theme, the
universal and the ultimate triumph of the Roman
spirit as the highest manifestation of man’s powers.
The Aeneid of Vergil views the destiny of Rome, and
that is the destiny of the world, from a transcendental
level. It was the work of another artist, Livy, to view it
from the standpoint of the man of his day who was
interested and intelligent enough to read the history of
Rome. Livy traced Rome’s history, from the foundation of the city almost to the time of his death, in one
hundred and forty-two books, of which only thirty-five
survive. It will not create any surprise if the reader is
told that it starts with Aeneas. It is a magnificently conceived prose epic, with the portraits ofthe great men of
Rome firmly drawn and the issues ofthe periods clearly
set out. It is the work ofan artist and not ofan historian.
Livy knows clearly what his object was in writing
history; he held that ‘this is the most wholesome
and faithful effect of the study of history; you
have in front of you real examples of every kind of
behaviour, real examples embodied in most conspicuous form; from these you can take, both for
yourself and for the state, ideals at which to aim, you
can learn also what to avoid because it is infamous either
in its conception or in its issue’. In other words, we are
to behold in the pages of his narrative the Romans of
87
THE ROMANS
old, idealised or at any rate strongly drawn, and we are
to see in them types ofmorality, and we are to base our
future conduct upon their examples. Whereas in Vergil’s Aeneid Aeneas had been taken by the Sibyl into
Hades to see the great Romans yet to be born, Livy asks
us to look back along the Roman portrait galleries and
to be proud and to imitate or to be warned. The conflicts and issues and struggles in the story of Rome are,
of course, apparent tct him; but they are described
in terms of individuals; there are not ‘movements’
or ‘tendencies’ or ‘forces’ at work unattached to men.
History is the record of the ‘doings of men’ (res gestae),
and the course of history, to Livy, has been determined
by Roman men in obedience to Roman gods; to Vergil
history is the working out of the destiny ofthe Roman
people seen in the light of eternity. To Horace there
was one duty, to proclaim with the inspiration of a
prophet that, ifRome did not change her heart and in
godliness worship the gods, she would have no history
at all; he summoned her to rededication. But all these
artists express their message, as artists must, in terms of
the individual and the special case. That is why Aeneas
and the whole company of heroes are worked so hard;
they embody ideals; and the Roman mind, and,
therefore, the Latin language, prefers not to deal
with abstracts, but to see things - movements and
tendencies and ideals - as expressed in persons who
have lived. Therefore history and moral philosophy,
with examples taken from real men, are the branches
of thought and literature which most interest the
Roman.
The ‘Augustan Age’ was heralded by an outburst of
really sincere feeling, which found sincere expression in
the work of three artists, Vergil, Horace, Livy, and of
those sculptors who carved the ‘religious’ sculpture of
88
100 THE ROMANS
West, and often were adapted and absorbed by native
religions, preserving titles and elements ofritual grafted
on to one another in curious variety. In course of time
distinction of race was largely forgotten, and men of
provincial nationality rose to eminence in literature, and
letters, and soldiering, and government. Livy came from
Padua, Seneca, and his brother Gallic, and Lucan, from
Cordova, Columella from Cadiz, Martial and Quintilian from Spain, Pronto and Apuleius from Africa; in
the third century, as we shall see, the Emperors themselves came from anywhere but Italy.
One powerful cause ofthe mingling ofnations is to be
found in slavery. During these centuries slavery was
profoundly altered. As wars of expansion ceased, captives were scarcer, and barbarians made bad slaves; the
economic fallacy ofslavery in agriculture and industry
became clearer and standards ofhumanity were raised.
From the lowest motives of freedom it was discovered
that, the nearer the lot ofa slave approached to that ofa
free man, the more useful he was. The Romans disliked
retail trade and the routine of business, and slaves performed these tasks for them; the slaves themselves were
often more skilled than their masters. Slaves had always
been allowed to have property oftheir own, and in the
early Empire this property was often considerable. The
elaborate law dealing with slaves’ property shows how
they could conduct business with free men, and it is
clear thatslaves owned land, property, ships, interests in
business concerns, even skves oftheir own, and that their
rights were protected by law. When Augustus started
his own civil service, he staffed it with slaves and freedmen; their status improved and the work of the townships was carried on by men who were strictly owned by
the state or the municipality. The position of the slave
was often enviable; he had opportunities without re-
THE ROMANS
that private generosity still flowed in spite ofthe parallel
system of the state. The Emperors were proud of the
scheme; Alim. Italiae appears on the coins of Trajan,
and Trajan’s Arch at Beneventum shows him greeted
by four women, one with a baby in her arms, and by
two Roman citizens, one with a boy on his shoulders,
the other with a boy at his side. The women, no doubt,
symbolise cities.
The legends on coins to which reference hasjust been
made perhaps call for a paragraph on one aspect of
ancient coinage. It was far more interesting than our
own, for the types were frequently changed, and the
legends and the pictures were chosen to suit the times.
Thus the Emperor could impress upon the public the
significance of a recent event, or he could prepare
opinion for a project, or he could stiffen morale by
focusing attention on ideals. In fact, the coinage not
only repairs some gaps in the historical evidence and
corroborates the rest, but also provides a commentary
and an interpretation, not less welcome or important
for being official. When Antoninus Pius was preparing
his subjects for the nine-hundredth anniversary of the
foundation of Rome, he issued medallions showing the
landing ofAeneas upon the shores ofItaly. The victory
over the Parthians and the recovery of the ‘lost standards’ is duly recorded upon gold coins issued by
Augustus. The fall ofJerusalem in a.d. 70, the bridging
ofthe Danube in Trajan’s Dacian wars, Hadrian’s tour
ofthe provinces, the adoption of a successor by a reigning Emperor and so his recommendation to the world at
large, specific acts ofimperial generosity or state-craft,
as for example the alimenta -this is the kind of event
recorded. Prosperity is acclaimed or invited; if there
had been civil war, ‘Concordia’ as a legend would
record its end, or even a hope that it might end. ‘Eter106
THE ROMANS
economic changes of the early empire, what had
happened to the old Roman virtues, the sense of duty
to state and to family and to friends and of loyalty to
moral standards? In spite ofthe extravagances offashion
and licence which surrounded them, the virtues persisted, less rugged perhaps, more humane but none the
less real and pervasive. They flourished chiefly in the
country in the cultivated society of men like Pliny, in
the farmstead from which sprang men such as the
Emperor Vespasian, an Emperor great through his
plain and honest common sense, in the villages and
country towns ofthe provinces now affected by Roman
ways of life. When Vespasian took a holiday, he went
back to the Sabine farmhouse of his forefathers, which
was kept unaltered. The letters of Pliny reveal a society
whose members were untouched by the excesses of the
capital, though many of them were men whose work
and interests brought them into closest touch with its
life. The men are interested in their work, their house
and land, their literary pursuits, and, perhaps above all,
their friends; the women embody the virtues ofthe wife
and mother and are interested in literature, in their
husbands’ pursuits and in their family; the children are
brought up in the healthy occupations of the countryside, and are trained in an unoppressive obedience and
a natural respect. The foundation of this calm and
healthy routine of life seems to be the life of the home
and the mutual regard and affection offriends. Whereas we find in the letters of Cicero a vivid commentary
on contemporary political life, in Pliny’s letters we have
a picture of that placid social life which was typical of
the ‘Antonine Age’ which immediately followed the age
ofPliny - and a picture drawn by one who found in the
small things of daily occupation an absorbing interest
and pleasure. Pliny himself had a public career; he
109
THE ROMANS
quiet, O Father, be your rest! May you call us, your
household, from feeble regrets and unmanly mourning
to contemplate your virtues, in presence ofwhich sorrow
and lamentation become a sin. May we honour you in
better ways - by our admiration, by our undying praise,
even, if our powers permit, by following your example.
That is the true honour, the true affection ofsouls knit
close to yours. To your daughter and widow I would
suggest that they revere the memory of a father and a
husband by continually pondering his deeds and sayings, and by cherishing his spiritual, above his physical,
presence. Not that I would place an absolute ban on
likenesses of marble or of bronze. But the image of the
human face, like that face itself, is feeble and perishable,
whereas the essence of the soul is eternal, never to be
caught and expressed by the material and skill of a
stranger, but only by you in your own living. All in
Agricola that won our love and admiration abides and
shall abide in the hearts of men, through endless ages,
in the chronicles offame. Many ofthe great men of old
will be drowned in oblivion, their name and fame forgotten. Agricola’s story has been told to posterity and
by that he will live.’
129
T.R.—5
THE ROMANS
ancient times has been thy glory; I dare to unseal those
sacred springs, and through Roman towns I sing the
song which Hesiod sang to the Greeks.’ The Roman uregarded the organic life ofthe town as the chiefinstru- tfment of civilisation; but he did not forget the country - nits pleasures, its challenge to work and management, its v'essential role as the mother of a nation’s sons. ^In the multiplication oftowns throughout the Empire s<Rome was singularly direct and practical in her 0methods. In most of her provinces town-life already aexisted: it was further encouraged and the towns were
often replanned and rebuilt. In Britain there were no vtowns before the Romans came; the only collections of ^dwellings were placed upon high ground and they were Fmade for defensive purposes against neighbouring 0tribes. For a century or two town life in the valleys was 1deliberately created as a means ofspreading a Roman 1manner of life. But the Briton did not take to it; the stowns decayed; they were deserted because the people spreferred to make their livelihood in the woods and *open lands rather than to act as middlemen or as arti- 'sans for the surrounding country. Roman civilisation, (of a very diluted character, betook itself to large self- 1supporting ‘villas’ or country houses. The policy of ^creating towns failed in Britain as it did not fail on the *Continent.
Wheneverthe Romansfounded a town, it was planned 1upon very definite lines. By means of a simple piece of 1apparatus by which the surveyor determined a right !angle, two wide streets were drawn intersecting at
ninety degrees. From this cross-roads as a starting-point
rectangular plots of land were marked; at regular
intervals streets of specified width were laid out. We
hear ofthe ‘building line’, and ofrules about the height
of buildings and of regulations excluding heavy traffic
„1'34
THE ROMANS
Again, economic conditions did not demand new
techniques and inventions. Though slave labour was
less abundant in the second century of the Empire than
earlier, there was no dearth of labour, and there was
little incentive to think out methods which would
economise time or toil. Moreover, the economic tendencies ofthe Empire were all against the development
of new processes. Though manufactured articles were
exported from one province to another, or from Italy
to the provinces, they were not exported on any scale
comparable with present practice; and, as the provinces
built up their own industries, they tended to satisfy
their own needs and to look no further afield for markets. In the third century there was a movement of
population away from the towns, for reasons which we
shall see in a later chapter; and, as country estates grew
larger and were increasingly managed under an almost
feudal system, old methods of manufacture became
stereotyped and were sufficient to supply the needs of a
limited area. Districts lived on their own economy, and
were independent of the resources or manufactures of
neighbouring districts. When self-sufficiency offithis
kind prevails, no stimulus is offered to the inventifn of
new techniques.
Finally, it must be remembered that the Roman
always disliked the routine and the actual manual
labour of industry. The point of view of the well-to-do
Roman is put clearly in a letter of Seneca, and it should
be observed that in essence it is little different from the
attitude of Plato. Seneca derives from Poseidonius, the
last of the Greek philosophers in the direct line of Plato
and Aristotle, a classification of arts into (i) the common and debasing, (ii) those which amuse the senses of
sight and hearing by illusionist tricks, (iii) those suitable to the early education of children, (iv) the liberal,
14I
THE ROMANS
or, as they should be called, the^arts consistent with
freedom (liberae). The first are ‘manual arts’, engaged
solely in supplying the needs oflife; the second are dexterous enough, but concerned only with a rather cheap
amusement; the third are the skills acquired in education; they are akin to liberal arts, for they are introductory to them. It is only the liberal arts which put a
man in the way of virtue, though they cannot make
him virtuous: ‘Only those arts are liberal which are concerned with virtue’, that is, with human character and
the human spirit manifesting itselfin moral behaviour.
And in the last resort it is philosophy alone which deals
with good and evil. Two or three generations earlier
Cicero had said much the same kind of thing in a long
discussion given in the first book of his treatise On
Duties. He thinks there can be nothing in a workshop
worthy ofa free man; the occupations ‘which the public
detests’, as for example those of customs officers and
money-lenders, are ‘sordid’; retail trade, since it buys
to sell immediately, is not honourable; to undertake
imports on a large scale and so to satisfy the needs of
a large area is more respectable. Arts which pander to
pleasure are despicable; medicine, architecture and the
like are higher in the scale since they involve long views
and their utility is obvious. There is something sordid
about all gain: only for agriculture is high praise reserved,, ‘nothing better, nothing more attractive, nothing more suitable for a free man’. The highest occupation is, of course, public service, undertaken with the
equipment of the virtues of integrity and devotion, of
kindliness and loyalty to the good of all fellow-citizens.
In spite of these views, men like Cicero and Seneca
were in fact concerned with commercial undertakings,
but only, as it were, at long range and on a large scale.
And in the course of the Empire these old-fashioned
I42 THE ROMANS
prejudices were much modified: men tended to agree
with Vespasian’s dictum, that money does not smell.
But it was too late and too difficult to change a tradition; besides, the other influences which we have
indicated above were all against the development of
new techniques, and such influences as these are often
beyond the diagnosis, or even the understanding, of
the men of the day, who certainly are powerless to
counteract them.
143
THE ROMANS
shortly described. When the official curators ofthe state
religion admitted into public recognition a non-Roman
cult by granting it a place among public festivals or a
site for a temple, they saw to it that the cult was transformed in a way suitable to Roman tradition. The
legend or story often underwent changes, the ritual and
terminology were modified, and the cult bore a strong
Roman imprint. When this was not possible, at least the
objectionable elements were purged out of it.
In the last century of the Republic the state religion
lost some of its hold upon Roman sentiment. The
increase of wealth and power had led to a materialism
which in its first flush could do without the gods; the
expansion of the Empire and the flow of foreigners to
Rome in the processes of trade and commerce, and of
other activities in which Rome was now plunged, had
brought foreign cults to Italy. These were readily embraced ; for they offered an emotional element lacking
in Roman religion and they exalted the importance of
the individual, offering excitement and personal experiences and often a destiny in a world to come. Moreover,
the contrast between the ‘people’ and the older and
governing elements ofthe population ofRome was now
very marked; the people were enlarged by foreigners
who were of a temperament different from the Roman
and politically were opposed to the senatorial party.
From natural inclination and for political and social
reasons they were indifferent or hostile to the religion
and standards ofthe older Roman tradition, and found
greater excitement in newer forms of cult. Pressure was
too great, and ofnecessity the state tolerated all religions
as practised by individuals provided that they were not
immoral, or politically dangerous in the sense that they
preached political doctrine under the form of religion.
By degrees several Eastern cults received official recog145
torial circles, to whom he had restored the custodianship of Roman religion, take their duties.
The tests applied to foreign cults, therefore, were three:
(i) Would they upset the dominant position oftheRoman
cults? (ii) Were they politically unsafe? (iii) Were they
morally undesirable? If these tests were satisfied,
toleration was complete.
From the time of Augustus a new form of Roman
cult makes its appearance -the worship ofthe Emperor.
The phrase ‘ theworship ofthe Roman Emperor’ is here
deliberately used, because it is commonly used;
whether it is the best phrase is open to doubt, as the
following brief account may perhaps suggest. At the
risk of over-simplification we may approach it from
three angles: first, from the viewpoint of the Eastern
provinces; secondly, from Rome; thirdly, from the
Western provinces.
In the Eastern Mediterranean the cult ofthe Emperor
was a spontaneous growth. The line between God and
man was indistinctly drawn. The theory that the gods
and heroes of old were men who had served well their
country or mankind was commonly accepted; philosophy had spoken ofthe divine spark or element in man.
Homage had been paid in Oriental fashion to the
successors ofAlexander in forms and language borrowed
from religion. A ruler who had conferred benefits upon
his subjects was saluted by titles such as ‘Benefactor’
{Euergetes) and ‘Saviour’ (Soter). The question of kingship and its responsibilities received much attention in
more than one school of Greek philosophy, and an extensive literature - some of which survives - discussed
the qualities of the ideal king; the justification for his
office was found in such qualities as love of humanity,
justice, kindliness and service to his subjects. For the
divinity of rulers resided in the degree to which they
THE ROMANS 147
I52 THE ROMANS
Democritus. The universe is the result of chance
agglomerations of atoms, which vary in size and shape
and fall through space. As they fall, they are liable to
swerve - why is not clear ^ and to collide and to form
combinations, and so the world has variety, and law is
not rigid, and man is subject to predetermining causes
over which he has no control. All things are made of
matter, even the soul, though matter varies in degree of
‘thinness’; matter can come apart into atoms, which
alone are indestructible; therefore all may perish except
atoms and the bodies of the gods which reside in the
empty spaces between the universes and so can collide
with nothing and so are immortal. If everything is
material, ideas and impressions of the senses - sight, for
example - are material; they arise because things
throw off husks of atoms, as it were, which strike the
sense organs of the mind itself. Thus, the gods really
exist, for-we have an idea ofthem; they are happy and
care nothingfor the happiness ofman, whom they did not
even create. Man may revere the gods and expose himselfto their emanations and so perhaps gain something
oftheir qualities; contemplation, therefore, may confer
some benefits. But the gods do not willingly or consciously influence men. Man’s goal is happiness - not
over-indulgence in pleasure, for this may bring pain;
calm ofbody and ofmind is the aim. Above all, getrid of
fears, fear of death and the displeasure of the gods;
death is unconsciousness; the displeasure ofthe gods is a
myth.
And so the poem expounds the implication of this
doctrine for human knowledge and human life, and
ranges far and wide. Here are the topics of the fifth
book: the nature ofthe world and mortality; the formation of the world; the motions of the heavenly bodies;
vegetation and animals and their origin; the extinction
THE ROMANS
sure and convincing. In such passages as these the Latin
hexameter verse rose to new heights and was not surpassed.
The poem stands remote and unique. Epicureanism
had no great following in Rome; Vergil and Horace
played with it and gave it up. Lucretius had no sectaries
to whom to preach, no predecessors to show him the
way, no posterity ofreaders to admire him as a philosopher; he was merely a poet whose genius bent to its will
a most intractable theme. With all his passionate
materialism Lucretius protests not so much against
religion as against the forms ofreligion which were gaining influence in Rome. He has been accused of exaggerating the religious crudity against which he inveighs
- reliance on dreams, and magical rites, and sacrifices,
and charms, and rank superstition. Did Lucretius
exaggerate their place in Roman religion? Certainly, if
he had thought only ofRoman religion; but he thought
also, and probably first, ofthose Eastern practices which
in his time were securing a firmer hold upon Roman
sentiment. It was not the gods, nor indeed an outlook
upon life which admitted its marvels and mystery,
against which Lucretius protested: what drove him
almost to madness was man’s self-inflicted and degrading enslavement to crude and terrifying superstitions (which a few moments ofclear reasoning would dissipate ,into nothingness. ‘The life offools in the end becomes a jhell upon earth.’ With the breathless fervour of a ,religious convert he attacked in the name ofreason the }irreligion of religion. tIf Epicureanism had not a great following at Rome, jthe reverse is true of Stoicism, for the Romans were ^natural Stoics long before they heard of Stoicism. The
founder of Stoicism was Zeno (350-260 b.c.) of Citium, vwho lived and taught at Athens. Stoicism looked back a154
THE ROMANS
than that ofPlato or Aristotle. At the present moment he
is derided as a mere middle-man ofno great intelligence.
In modest depreciation of his philosophical works he
once wrote in a letter to Atticus, ‘they are copies and
therefore cost less trouble; I supply only the words, and
I don’t lack those!’, and he is now taken at his word. In
one sense he was right, but in supplying the words he
rendered an incalculable service to European thought
and letters. He moulded the Latin language into such
form that it became supple enough and clear enough to
put within the reach of any intelligent man not only the
philosophical ideas with which his age was familiar, but
also those ideas which were yet to be created by Christian
thought and controversy and by European science and
learning in every field. Moreover, even ifCicero’s works
are derivative, they select what they derive and present
it in such form that there is probably no better introduction to moral philosophy - not excepting Plato himself. Of originality there is none - except in style, language and presentation; but century after century
learned its philosophical grammar from these works
and they are still invaluable. Here are some ofthe titles:
On the State, an imaginary discussion between Scipio
Aemilianus and his friends, and surviving only in mutilated form; On the Laws, a discussion between Cicero,
Atticus and Quintus Cicero; On the Ends of Good and
Evil, another discussion in which Epicurean, Stoic and
Academic views are stated and criticised; The Tusculan
Disputations-, On the Nature ofthe Gods', On Old Age (Scipio
and Laelius visit Cato and listen to his wisdom); On
Friendship', On Duties. These are some of the titles of
what are commonly called his philosophical works -
many of them are essays and musings and rambles enlivened by anecdote rather than set and methodical
treatises. Throughout these writings Stoicism finds ex156 THE ROMANS
plicit and incidental treatment; thus in the Academica a
general view ofZeno’s teaching is given, in In the Nature
of the Gods (Book ii) Stoic physics is treated, in On the
Ends (Book iii) Stoic ethics.
Before speaking ofthe teachings of Stoicism, we may
glance briefly at three of its later exponents. Of
Seneca’s public career, of his life at the court of Nero,
of his wealth, and his death as an alleged conspirator
against the life of Nero, we must say nothing; nor can
we review the estimates ofhim made by modern critics,
some of whom loathe him as the supreme embodiment
of a nauseating hypocrisy, while others regard him as a
saint - ‘this pagan monk, this idealist, who would have
been at home with StJerome or Thomas a Kempis’, who
felt an ‘evangelistic passion, almost approaching St
Paul’s, to open to these sick perishing souls the vision of
a higher life through the practical discipline of philosophy’. The best thing to do is to take his works as they
stand and judge them on their merits. There are several
treatises with such titles as On Providence, dealing with
the age-long question why the good suffer; they do not
suffer, says Seneca, in the ways that really matter; On
Anger-, On the Life of Happiness', On Tranquillity of Mind',
On Mercy, addressed to Nero and the source ofsome of
Shakespeare’s ideas in Portia’s great speech; On Kindness. Besides this he wrote {a) the Natural Questions,
which, if of no value scientifically, has some excellent
descriptions of natural phenomena, {b) tragedies, of
great influence in European tragedy, and (c) letters to
Lucilius. The letters, which are a hundred and twentyfour in number, are musings or meditations or essays
upon ‘serious subjects’ rather than letters; sometimes
they start with an anecdote or some real happening to
Seneca or Lucilius, and it is not long before the sermon
follows.
157
THE ROMANS
upon which, in the mind ofthe thinker, the bases of all
behaviour should logically rest. Now the tendency of
the East had been to base morality, not upon a philosophical justification, but upon the authority of the
prophet or seer whose intuition or moral sensitiveness
seemed to carry its own credential. Thus Stoicism, and
particularly Roman Stoicism, paid little attention to a
basic philosophy and built up a large body of precept.
Though reference was made to one or two fundamental
postulates, what really carried authority was the example or the teaching of the Stoic ‘wise man’ or sage
{sapiens), the man who possessed the Stoic insight into
the canons of moral behaviour. ‘What will the “sage”
do in such and such circumstances?’ is the Stoic criterion, whereas the earlier Greek question was ‘How am I
to discover by an intellectual process what is right and
therefore what is right in this particular case?’
It would be unprofitable to set out the slender teachings on physics and logic and psychology with which
the Stoic made play, or to expose their inconsistencies.
It must be enough to say that to them the important
thing for man was that ‘he should live according to
Nature’, and Nature was that Force or Providence or
Reason or Fate which ordains that things shall be as
they are. Sometimes it was spoken of as God, sometimes
God was equated with Nature and Stoicism became
Pantheism. Man’s hope of happiness lies in subordination to this all-pervading and life-sustaining Power.
(The reader who remembers what wds said about ‘subordination’ in the first chapter will see why Stoicism
particularly appealed to the Romans; and, if he also
remembers their tendency to canonise their national
heroes, and particularly Cato, he will not be surprised
at the authority of the ‘sage’.) The gods of popular
mythology are held to be the popular version of this
l62
l66 THE ROMANS
influence of Stoicism contributed much. The xlviith
letter of Seneca deals with the attitude which a Stoic
master should adopt towards his slaves.
In the Greco-Roman civilisation ofthe Empire there
were many other philosophies which a man might
adopt - the Cynic, the neo-Platonist, besides adaptations of Platonism and Scepticism and amalgamations
of many others. Their study is of great value; Plotinus,
the greatest ofthe neo-Platonists, is ofabsorbing interest
both in himself and in his influence. But they are outside our scope; for we are considering the Romans, and
the specifically Roman philosophy was Stoicism.
THE ROMANS
The fourth century will present a picture very strange
to one familiar only with the first and second centuries;
for the Empire had passed through the anarchy and the
confused ambitions ofthe third century and was transformed; indeed, only by the most desperate efforts of
Diocletian and Constantine was it held together at all.
In the light ofthe changes it is possible to see somethin;
of the weaknesses of the golden Antonine Age.
Ifso complex a period as the third century, so defici ­
ent too in good historical witness, admits of any simple
clues, perhaps they may be found, first, in the movement
of power and wealth and vigour away from Rome am!
Italy to the provinces, secondly, in the ever-growin;;;
pressure upon the frontier provinces exerted by ‘barbarian’ tribes. To some extent, but not wholly, these
aspects of the question are related. Clearly, threat to
the frontiers thrusts into prominence the importance
of the frontier provinces. But apart from this the provinces had grown in wealth and power and significance.
During the early centuries Rome and Italy had been
the centre from which radiated Roman civilisation; as
that civilisation was appropriated by the provinces,
they became more self-reliant from many points of
view - economic, military, intellectual and even political. The new importance ofthe provinces at the expense
of Rome and Italy was the measure of Rome’s success;
but her success was fraught with disaster for herself.
The factors which contributed to the turmoil and
confusion of the third century were complex, and no
attempt to show them at work can be made here; nor
indeed is it easy to give one priority or precedence over
another; they acted and reacted upon one another. In
general terms they were as follows.
In the early days ofthe Republic the army had been
recruited from Rome; then Italy was drawn upon, then
168
THE ROMANS
understood what they had inherited. Roman-ness
(Romanitas) was sadly diluted.
For at all costs the army must be increased, till by
the end of the fourth century it was double the size of
the army of Augustus. New systems of defence, which
relied no longer on the fighting line of the frontier, but
upon successive points of consolidation arranged in
depth, new arms, new specialist corps were demanded.
For the pressure from beyond the Empire was constant
and severe, and it operated at many points at once.
The garrison of the province was no longer adequate;
its value presupposed spasmodic and isolated attack,
whereas, as pressure was intensified, a mobile striking
force was required to be sent at speed to the point most
threatened. The earlier policy of buying off barbarian
hordes by regular subsidies, at first successful, failed as
the Empire grew obviously weaker; the settling of
marauding tribes inside the frontier, tried by Marcus
Aurelius, for example, only made the defences less
assured. And so one race was succeeded by others in
growing numbers; the Carpi raided Dacia and were
followed by Goths, till Dacia was surrendered and a
Roman province became their home. The Goths over a
long series of years drove into East Germany, Tran ­
sylvania, Illyricum, and raided by sea the whole ofAsia
Minor, and penetrated as far into Greece as Athens and
Sparta. The Juthungi reached North Italy; the Alemanni, who first appear about a.d. 210, thrust into
Gaul and Italy, and for a moment appeared before
Rome. Meantime, the Persian power had revived and
was often victorious over the Roman armies sent to resist
its depredations. The Imperial Governmentwasstruggling for survival and it could not meet the manifold
threats. It is not to be wondered, therefore, thatseparate
parts of the Empire took independent steps to save
170 THE ROMANS
themselves, setting up states and armies of their own
and defying the central government. Such were the
so-called Gallic Empire, and the state ofPalmyra under
Queen Zenobia, who even conquered Egypt and for a
short time held the chiefgranary ofRome in her power.
Meantime, the invading hordes plundered and burnt
and slew; they carried off a vast treasure of gold and
precious objects, and the Empire sank into poverty.
And, as happens, they often assimilated the civilisation
of their victims, and during these troubled years Germans and Romans drew nearer to one another in habits
and culture and outlook, and the beginnings of the
German-Roman states took shape.
The centre of gravity was moving east. Where the
Emperor was, there was Rome, and he was most often
east of the Adriatic sea. The Balkan Peninsula was the
last to be romanised, and was most vitally conscious of
its Roman-ness, whatever its interpretation might be.
It furnished the most vigorous troops, and the troops
created their generals, and from its generals came
Emperors. The East with its inherited wealth and longer
tradition ofcivilisation inevitably exercised itsinfluence;
imperial autocracy drew upon the age-long experience
of Eastern monarchy; and in face of the menace of
invasion Rome was no longer strategically suitable
as a headquarters of a government, now military above
all else. Italy was fast becoming a province rather than
a land privileged as the cradle of Rome.
The economic effects of civil war, anarchy, disintegration, devastation ofland and city by invading hordes
were incalculable. Already in the Antonine Age there
were ominous symptoms. The once flourishing cities of
the provinces found it harder to meet their expenses;
imperial taxes increased; the local councillors found
office increasingly a burden, for larger calls were made
171
THE ROMANS
on their pockets. The value ofmoney declined; industry
satisfied local needs and found no incentive to distribute
more widely; production failed to see the kind of goods
that were needed, and remained stagnant. With war
and invasion capital was destroyed, taxes were ground
out of town and countryside to pay for the war; when
money was not forthcoming, goods were seized, particularly those which would supply the needs ofthe armies.
Lands went out of cultivation for lack of labour; the
hardest and least pleasant forms ofwork were avoided;
yet the army must have supplies. Ships were impressed
to carry those supplies; the civilian population was a
secondary matter; the standard of living declined as
imports were confined to military necessities and inflation brought its attendant evils. Yet still, though the
Empire starved, the armies must be fed and armed and
clothed and transported.
It is difficult in a few words to paint the picture in
dark enough colours. The Empire was within an ace of
falling apart and settling down in utter collapse in
poverty and famine and ruin. ‘Shall I marry? Am I to
be sold up ? Shall I have to be a member of the local
Council? Shall I get my salary? Shall I quit?’ These
are questions put by bewildered folk to an oracle in
Egypt, and preserved to us on papyri. Trivial, but
eloquent ofthe ordinary man’s state ofmind. A petition
to the Emperor sent from Asia Minor reads: ‘We are
most atrociously oppressed and squeezed by those whose
duty it is to protect the people ... Officers, soldiers, city
magistrates and imperial agents come to our village and
take us away from our work and requisition our oxen;
they exact what is not due and we suffer outrageous injustice and extortion.’
Yet the Empire as a single whole was saved as by, a
miracle. It was saved by the exertions oftwo men; but
172 THE ROMANS
it was saved at the most appalling price, so appalling
that historians have sometimes asked whether it had
not better perished. These two men were Diocletian and
Constantine. Diocletian, Emperor a.d. 284-305, of
Illyrian birth, was the son of a freedman; he served
in the army and was elevated to the throne by the
officers. Constantine, Emperor a.d. 306-337, was also
an Illyrian, the natural son ofConstantius and Helena;
he too was nominated Emperor by the soldiers, and had
to fight for the throne. Both men were able organisers.
The measures of Diocletian, completed by Constantine, contained little that was really new, and no attempt will be made here to show the process of development. They regularised and systematised the precedents and practices of the years of stress, when the
Empire was in a state of siege; they converted emergency measures dictated by the urgent needs of the
crisis into the permanent structure of government.
Nothing is easier for a state to do on the plea ofincreased
protection, or security, or prevention of inflation - in
short, on the plea ofthe continuance ofthe emergency.
And so the state became paramount; it was interested
not in the individual as an individual, but merely as a
member of a trade or class or an ‘interest’ organised to
satisfy its own economic or administrative needs. Thus
each single man became, in effect, the slave ofthe state.
The Imperial Government clamped down upon the
whole Empire the bars which were to hold it together
and which achieved its imprisonment.
The reforms of Diocletian and Constantine were a
stupendous effort to organise, or to plan, security. And
first, the security ofthe Emperor, that is, ofthe unity of
the Empire.
For sixty or seventy years the imperial authority had
virtually been in the gift of the soldiers, and anarchy
173
had resulted. Now it was to be dissociated from dependence upon any sectional interest. The Emperor’s person was to be remote and detached; he wasrarely seen in
public, he was surrounded by a court of the Oriental
pattern. Court officials, with new titles, guarded his
person, and admitted to audience; semi-religious ceremonial invested him with divine authority, which he
wielded as the partner ofGod upon the throne. Augustus had claimed to be the chiefcitizen; Diocletian was a
monarch.
How, then, to break away from dependence upon the
army, and not perish at its hands? The changes in the
army which had come about gradually during the last
hundred years were accepted and extended and systematised. Ihe army was no longer officered by the senatorial and equestrian orders; ‘barbarians’ rose to the
highest posts; the career of the soldier became exclusively military and professional. The army commander
no longer carried out administrative work; civil and
military posts were separated; the proconsul, familiar in
early days as governor of a province and also commander-in-chief, was a thing of the past. The general was
dependent for his supplies on the civil administration
which was responsible to the Emperor, and he was thus
held in check. Henceforth the soldier was to have no
touch with administration, justice, supplies or taxation,
hie was a soldier pure and simple, with no inducements
to meddle with other matters, which were all in the
hands of imperial officials, and no opportunities to
gather into his hands the resources necessary for political initiative. Strategy, tactics, weapons all changed;
the auxiliaries became more honoured than the legions;
cavalry, the arm of the barbarian, took precedence
over infantry, for barbarians had to be fought by barbarians and by their own weapons. The frontier garrir74 the romans
sons (limitanei), once the defenders and disseminators of
Roman civilisation and honoured as such, were now
the least efficient troops, for they were recruited by
forced levy from landowners, and were reinforced by
hired barbarians. The troops stationed near the cities on
the interior lines ofcommunication (comitatenses) to form
a mobile force now stood highest in repute, though the
civilians ofthe neighbourhood were often hard tried by
their exactions and rapacity.
To maintain the army the Empire was turned into a
vast administrative machine designed to produce taxes.
The machinery took more men out of production, and
civil servants have a way of attracting to themselves
more civil servants. Diocletian saw that the Empire was
too large for one man to govern; there were precedents
for ‘associate-emperors’, and so he divided the Empire
and placed over half ofit his partner, entitled like himself an Augustus. To each Augustus was assigned a
‘Caesar’, a kind of adjutant though with special territorial responsibility. The theory was that the Caesar
would succeed the Augustus, and so the problem of
succession would be solved. The provinces, Italy included, were now broken up into more than a hundred
areas grouped into dioceses, the dioceses themselves
being grouped into prefectures. Titles were changed; it
is now that comes makes its appearance to denote official
position, as e.g. the ‘Count’ ofAfrica; the dioceses were
under Vicars, as e.g. ‘the Vicar ofSpain ; the Emperor s
advisory council was the Consistorium.
One of Diocletian’s most urgent tasks was the reform
ofthe currency in order to check inflation. Closely connected with this was his attempt to fix maximum prices
for goods and services. The edict, ofwhich partsurvives,
defines the prices for such things as food, timber,
leather, textiles, cosmetics and the like. It fixes the rates
THE ROMANS 175
THE ROMANS
the farm, nor the tenant-farmer the estate; moreover,
his children must be brought up to succeed him. If,
overburdened by taxes, the landowner abandoned his
land, the state took it, and eventually the greater portion of the Empire passed into state-ownership. In the
same way factories were nationalised. Transport was an
essential service; and so the voluntary associations of
dockyard labourers, merchant marine and the like were
used by the state as instruments of coercion; membership must be maintained and contracts for public services must be carried out. Hence arose a caste system;
no matter what his work - town councillor, soldier,
factory worker, official - each was tied to his job and
status, and his children after him. If by chance he
did ‘improve’ himself and obtained a permit to change
his work, he would be liable to higher taxation; he
might then be ruined. Better to remain as he was. Thus,
there was no incentive to enterprise or initiative or
saving; the state effectively killed them all. Production
fell, and with it the standard of living; the rigid uniformity of a lifeless and static mediocrity prevailed.
The price ofsecurity wasthe absorption ofthe individual
by the state.
The movement ofthe centre ofgravity eastwards likewise received recognition. Diocletian had virtually made
his court and headquarters at Nicomedia on the eastern
coast ofthe sea ofMarmora; for in the past the dangers
had come from beyond the Danube and from Persia;
Nicomedia was a strategic point. But the ancient city of
Byzantium, a Dorian colony founded about 600 B.c., lay
across the water, protected or approached by gates of
sea and served by an incomparable harbour. Here was
an impregnable site for the new Christian city of
Constantine, the new capital of the new Christian
Empire, Constantinople. Years were given to its buildI77
THE ROMANS
ing; it was adorned with works ofbeauty gathered from
many cities, pagan works and Christian alike. But no
pagan sacrifice was offered within its walls, for it was
dedicated to the new faith. For nearly a thousand years
it stood inviolate, till in 1204 it was taken by Crusaders
professing the faith of its founder; but till then it sheltered the religion, the learning and the power of the
East Roman Empire, the so-called Byzantine civilisation.
And so the Empire was held together. Diocletian and
Constantine undertook a work ofreconstruction, muck1
as Augustus had undertaken it years earlier. But, whereas Augustus reconstructed by mobilising forces and
energies and goodwill to undertake a voluntary effort,
the reformers of the third century had to impose a
machinery designed to extract the resources necessary
for the work of government and the ensuring of security. Of contemporary literature there is little, for the
spontaneity necessary to literature was lacking. In time
life and letters revived; a new imagination manifested
itself, but in the members rather than in the body itself,
in Africa and Gaul and Egypt. It throbbed more
strongly in the arteries of Christian thought and life
j than in the tired channels of paganism; and eventually
those members detached themselves to live their own
life.
i78
THE ROMANS
jews visiting Jerusalem for the Feast were converted.
The Christian leaders were soon driven by Jewish persecution from Jerusalem to the synagogues of Samaria
and Syria; persecutors followed, Saul being among
them. Soon two victories were won; henceforth the Gospel was to be preached to Gentiles, and converts were
freed from Jewish customs. The Apostle ofthe Gentiles
could now carry a Gospel emancipated from Judaism,
though the enmity of ‘Judaisers’ dogged all his travels.
St Paul travelled by the high roads of commerce and
communication now made secure by the Roman peace;
he visited first theJewish communities and then preached
to the Gentiles, using the Greek language of the day.
His converts were mainly of the lowest social grade;
and, when his preaching caused disorder, it was the
Jews who excited it. He was protected by Roman officials as a Jewish sectary. Festus would have dismissed
his case as ‘concerning your own religion’ if St Paul,
when accused of treason, had not appealed to Caesar;
for, as Festus saw, the isssue was one not of treason but
ofreligious observance.
But, if the Roman Government knew no distinction
at this time between Christianity and Judaism, the people soon did; for it learnt that there was in their midst
something more contemptible, and something more
dangerous, than Judaism. By a.d. 64, the date of the
persecution underNero, the government had atlast taken
notice ofit; for, as presented by its attackers, Christianity
deservedly provoked official attention; it failed to satisfy
the terms on which Rome granted tolerance.
In the first place, Christianity was particularly vulnerable to misinterpretation: secondly, Christians often
deliberately invited persecution. To the Roman of the
time Christians appeared to hate the human race. They
looked forward to the early return of Christ when all
181
THE ROMANS
but themselves would be destroyed by fire as being evil;
and in this disaster to ‘Eternal Rome’ and to the hopes
ofmankind they seemed to glory. In the second century
and onwards this attitude of mind expressed itself in a
different way; Christians went out of their way to provoke enmity that they might win a crown ofmartyrdom.
Christians came from the lower orders of society, and
their teachings seemed to aim at social revolution. They
masked behind secret meetings the most frightful practices - gross immorality and cannibalism (for such interpretation could be put upon the content ofsuch passages as St John vi. 52-9). They disrupted family life,
for a convert from a family would not take part in the
family worship or in some elements offamily life, such
as amusements. They gave evidence of their beliefthat
the world was soon to perish by their refusal to cooperate in religiousfestivals, to shoulder civic responsibilities, or to serve in the army. But the pagan valued his
world and his civilisation. Such was the popular attitude
to Christianity in the second century.
The Roman Government had easy tests. Had the cult
been ‘recognised’ under the ‘Law ofAssociations’ which
forbade regular gatherings of people except under
licence? Ifnot, it was an ‘unlicensed religion’ and must
be suppressed, for it might hide anti-social or criminal
plots ofthe worst kind. The magistrate in the course of
his duties could deal with that. But the matter became
more important iftreasonable activities were suspected;
would the Christian make a demonstration of loyalty
to ‘Rome and Augustus’?
The Christian refused; the state persisted; each misunderstood the other; each started from an opposite
point. To the Roman the unity of the Empire was of
vital importance, and homage to ‘Rome and Augustus’
embodied and expressed that ideal. It was an act of
l82
THE ROMANS
the number of Christians who fraudulently obtained
certificates cast discredit upon the faith. In a.d. 257
Valerian attempted to bring about the Christian tolerance which had been refused for two centuries by ordering the higher clergy to sacrifice, while permitting them
to remain Christian in private; and in the east laymen
and clergymen were punished for being Christians,
especially harsh penalties being prescribed for senators
and knights. The Church as an organisation was thus
attacked. But it was under Diocletian that the issue was
most clearly defined. In his desperate efforts to cement
together the Empire he was particularly sensitive to
influences which tended towards separatism. Though
at first he underestimated the strength ofthe Christians,
by a.d. 303 he had reached the conclusion, under pressure from Galerius, his partner in rule that there was
indeed a state within the state. His measures went
beyond precedent. No Christian could hold Roman
citizenship; therefore he could hold no post in the imperial or municipal services, nor could he appeal from
a judicial verdict. No Christian slaves could be freed.
The churches and the sacred books were to be destroyed. This edict was followed by others. The clergy
were to be imprisoned and were to be made by torture
to sacrifice to the gods. The aim was to rob the laity of
its leaders and the organisation of the Church of its
main supports. Finally, this last edict was made to apply
to all Christians.
Thus, in the interest of the unity of the Empire,
Christianity was to be broken up and dispersed. And
the edicts, while they did not bring about the unity of
the Empire, did cause disunion in the Church.
But during the years which followed, the unity ofthe
Empire was threatened rather by the open conflict of
rival Emperors; and in a.d. 31 i the next stage was
186
reached in the relations ofChurch and Empire. ‘Nevertheless, because great numbers still persist in their opinions, and because we have perceived that at present
they neither pay reverence and due adoration to the
gods, nor yet worship their own God, therefore we ...
havejudged fit to ... permit them again to be Christians.
... It will be the duty ofthe Christians ... to pray to God
for our welfare and for that of the public and for their
own ...’ This was the ‘Edict of Toleration’ issued by
Galerius, a former persecutor, as he lay dying ofa frightful disease. But it was the so-called Edict ofMilan, a.d.
313, which put the matter on a new and regular basis -
the religious neutrality of the state. It is possible that
no such pronouncement was issued as an edict; but, as
given by the historian Lactantius, the ‘Edict’ certainly
sums up authentically the instructions sent by the Emperor Constantine to his officials during the years a.d.
311-13. Its drift can be gathered from these extracts:
‘... no man should be denied leave of attaching himself
to the rites of Christians or to whatever other religion
his mind directed him, that thus the supreme divinity,
to whose worship we freely devote ourselves, might continue to vouchsafe his favour and beneficence to us ...
The open and free exercise of their respective religions
is granted to all others, as well as to the Christians ...
and we mean not to derogate aught from the honour
due to any religion or its votaries.’ All Church property
was to be restored, even at a cost to the imperial exchequer. And at the same time the Emperor Constantine declared himself a Christian, and without persecuting paganism weighted the scales of neutrality strongly
in favour of Christianity.
The Roman Government had been puzzled about
Christianity. It took time to discover the new faith; it
had discovered it and misunderstood it. Through misTHE ROMANS 187
THE ROMANS
understanding it had applied an impossible test; the
test refused, it persecuted spasmodically; intermittent
persecution seemed to serve only as a stimulant; the
first general persecution was too late; neutrality was
now the only course, and it remained the permanent
policy for sixty years. Emperors might be pagan, and,
indeed, like Julian the Apostate (a.d. 361), might give
all encouragement to paganism, just as Constantine before him had supported the Christian Church; but
neutrality officially prevailed. In a.d. 378 the last step
was taken by Theodosius, who surrendered neutrality
and proscribed paganism. The temples were nationalised, and became museums ofart. The calendar hitherto
based on pagan festivals was reformed. The gods were
legislated out of existence, though not without opposi-!
tion. The state employed the same instrument in favour
of Christianity which had been employed against it in
the previous century. And paradoxically the state was
! influenced by the same motive as before. Whereas, earlier, in the supposed interest of the survival ofthe Empire as a unity held together by religious sanctions, it
had persecuted Christianity, now, with the same purpose
it strove to stamp out the enemies ofChristianity. Hope
of the success and survival of the Empire depended on
that which had once been thought to be disruptive of
imperial unity and welfare. The state placed itselfunder
the aegis of the Christian religion, the religion of a i
minority ofits members. Thus, the state was true to the j
beliefofthe Romans ofthe earlyRepublic, thatRome depended upon the goodwill ofdivine power. So, it might
be said, had primitive Roman faith vindicated itself.
So momentous and so sudden a reversal of policy as
came about in a.d. 313 cannot be explained as the inevitable and almost predictable result proceeding from |
sufficient causes. The historian, tracing the course of
l88 THE ROMANS
things and assessing the nature of men’s thoughts, is
suddenly startled by an event for which he is totally unprepared. The change was brought about by one man,
Constantine, whose character refuses to fit into the pattern ofthe age, whose convictions are uniquely his own,
whose very language, as shown in letters and rescripts,
is new and unexpected. Twenty or so years after the
persecution by Diocletian, Constantine, the Roman
Emperor, writes such sentences as are quoted below (the
circumstances in which they were written cannot here
be narrated): ‘divisions ofthis kind (iti the Church) should
not be kept from me, for by them the high God may be
moved not only against the human race, but also against
me myself, to whose care by His heavenly will He has
entrusted the guidance of all the affairs of earth, and
so may in anger decide things otherwise than hitherto.
For then indeed shall I be able to be most fully free from
anxiety and to hope to receive always all that is most
prosperous and best from the ready generosity of the
most powerful God, when I shall see that mankind,
held together in brotherly unity, adores the most holy
God with the worship ofthe Catholic religion, as is due
to Him.’ ‘The result {of schism) is that the very men who
ought to preserve brotherhood in unity of mind and
spirit stand apart from one another in a shameful and
wicked feud and so provide those who keep their minds
turned away from this most holy religion with an excuse
for mocking at it.’ ‘The Gospel books and the Apostles’
books and the prophecies ofthe ancient prophets teach
us clearly what we ought to think about the Divine.
Therefore let us drive away the strife which creates war
and let us find the solution of our problems in those
divinely-inspired writings.’ ‘The eternal and divine
goodness ofour God which is past understanding by no
means permits the conditions ofmankind to wander too
189
THE ROMANS
immediate return of Christ, and its language was the
language of ‘apocalypse’; later it took a longer view,
and reasoned defence and explanation of its doctrines
brought the Gospel to the educated; and attack - the
best means of defence - assailed the foundations of
paganism. Its attitude to works of pagan literature and
learning had at first-been uncompromising, for they
were the bible ofpaganism. Afterstruggles ofconscience
the ablest men ofthe Church realised that pagan literature was separable from paganism, and that Christianity could not refuse itself the aid of education and
scholarship. In the early part of this period of three
hundred years the hostility of the people had set in
motion the repressive measures ofthe state; in the latter
part the state, more nervously solicitous for imperial
unity than in the Principate, itself took the initiative,
while Christian and pagan on the whole settled down in
peace with one another under an all-pervasive domination. In so far as originality of thought and expression
survived, the advantage lay with Christianity; for
while pagain thought and letters and religion could only
plough again familiar acres now almost exhausted,
Christianity had a new interpretation oflife to offer, and
its vitalising message transformed old modes ofthought
and language. Even before the reign ofConstantine the
Church held property, though under what legal title
is obscure. From persecution to neutrality to favour;
from degradation to respectability to dignity; from unquestioning faith to statements of creed couched in the
most searching of philosophical terms; from ignorance
to learning. Henceforth the Christian Church was armed
with all the panoply which Greco-Roman civilisation
could furnish for the next period ofits history. But that
is the chapter ofthe Middle Ages, though in a very real
sense still the history of Rome.
191
CHAPTER X
THE FIFTH CENTURY
Neither grey hairs nor wrinkles can suddenly take away moral authority; a life
honourably lived reaps its rewards of authority to the end. cicero
We now pass to the beginning of the fifth century, not
in order to give an outline of events, but to look back
from that standpoint upon some ofthe changes which
had taken place in Roman institutions and ideas. For
, present purposes all that need be recorded between a.d.
337 (the death of Constantine) and a.d. 4.00 is that a
brief attempt had been made by Julian to revitalise
paganism, that Theodosius had established Christianity
as the official religion, that in a.d. 395 his two sons had
divided the Empire into two parts, Arcadius ruling in
the East and Honorius in the West, and that the pressure of Huns and Goths upon the northern frontier of
the Danube had become severe and alarming.
In the sphere of government and public life the old
ideals have passed away, though the names remain, a
shadow without substance; the reign ofDiocletian and
its inauguration of the all-powerful state had in fact
destroyed all that Cato or Cicero, or even Pliny, had
regarded as an essential characteristic of Rome.
The partnership of Augustus and the Senate had
gradually broken down; the position of Princeps had
become more autocratic during the first century ; and,
though for a moment under the Antonines the Senate
had dreamed of a restoration of its position when it
exercised influence in the choice ofan Emperor’s successor, those dreams had been shattered in the third century by the army’s usurpation of authority. After DiovA f~<~>
cletian the Senate, though it might meet as a council,
gradually became an ‘order ofsociety’, enjoying certain
exemptions from taxes and certain dignities. Very many
members ofthis order had never seen the city of Rome
or even travelled outside the provinces in which they
were born. From being an ‘order’ ofmen elected by the
people to magistracies and so qualified to sit in the great
council of the Republic, which in fact though not by
right had governed the Roman world, senators became
a stratum ofsociety, enjoying privileges but no power.
They drew away from other men, aloof and self-contained, and cast back their minds to the traditions and
the literature and culture of an age which they fondly
thought could never really pass away. The,power ofthe
Emperor, girt about with the sanctity, first, of ‘divinity’
and later of vice-regency as God’s representative, was
absolute and was not called into question. The hope of
a Republican restoration which the senators ofthe early
Empire had cherished had now long been forgotten.
Yet the old phrases are kept; when in a.d. 458 the
Emperor Majorian writes, purely out of politeness, to
the Senate, he addressesthem aspatresconscripti, ‘enrolled
fathers’, the most ancient name of the Senate dating
from the early days of the Republic. He acknowledges
that the Senate has chosen him and the army has ordained his appointment. He describes himself as Princeps, the title used by Augustus; yet he also speaks of his
regnum, his position asjrcx, the title abhorred byRomans,
and he hopes to serve faithfully the respublica, the ancient
name for the commonwealth, which has compelled him
to reign.
Roman citizenship had once been a valued possession. In the early days of the Republic citizenship had
been fought for and won; in the last century of the
Republic ‘allies’ of Rome had wrested it from an unTHE ROMANS 193
THE ROMANS
willing donor. The appeal made in virtue of his Roman
citizenship by the greatest Roman citizen of the first
century a.d., St Paul, had received immediate attention. The dignity ofthat status, as well as its rights and
duties, had been the creation of a long process of
political development, which had come to its full
stature under the early Empire. It was already declining when the Emperor Caracalla enfranchised virtually the whole ofthe Roman world, in order that the
whole world might pay the taxes due from a Roman
citizen. And now the idea of citizenship had vanished;
the municipal towns no longer cherished a valued civic
life, they bore only the burdens of taxation; and town
councillors had exchanged the pride of office for the
enforced responsibility oftax-collection. Men were find
ing in membership ofthe Christian Church the sense of
citizenship which neither Rome nor municipality could
any longer offer them.
Many of the great offices of state, the magistracies,
had disappeared or had been so altered as not to be the
same offices except in name. The function ofthe praetor
was now to organise public shows; once he had been a
high judicial authority. The consulship was a high
honour -for it was bestowed by the Emperor - and was
nothing more; yet in a.d. 399 it was so valued that it is
called a ‘Divine reward’. The great provincial commands, formerly the last honour and the heaviest
responsibility of those who had served the state in a
series ofmagistracies to which they were elected by the
people, became rungs in the ladder of promotion
ascended by the professional civil servant employed by
the Emperor. Their original powers and duties were
divided and placed in the hands ofseparate officials, all
acting as a check upon one another. Once the provinces
owed their romanisation in great part to the enlightened
194 THE ROMANS
policy of able administrators; now the civil servant was
hated, for his function was to extort taxes, to see that
none left their appointed guild or sought other work or
evaded tribute to the state in money or kind or services.
The state was the universal master. In the early days of
the Republic, when the .plebeians had demanded a
champion, they forced upon the patricians the creation
of tribunes to safeguard their interests. And now the
oppressed found their protection again, not in a magistrate ofthe state, but inTEe persons ofthe bishops ofthe
Church. Popular demand forced upon men ofits choice
the rule of bishop; St Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, was
not even baptised when he was compelled by the crowd
to shoulder the responsibilities ofthis office. The letters
of men like St Ambrose and St Augustine show clearly
the work of the bishops. They resist official tyranny,
they withstand provincial governors, with whom personally they are often on friendly terms, they take matters to the imperial ear itself, they arbitrate in disputes
and guide and guard their peoples in all the difficulties
of their lives. It is now that the Church becomes the
leader in the alleviation of poverty and distress, in providing hospitals and schools and orphanages and charity
of all kinds. And so it offered to men a hope and belief
that the individual still was of worth, though society
might be in bondage to the state. The bishop virtually
took over the functions of the city magistrate who by
this time was an unwilling tool ofthe Government; and
the bishop was the choice of the city population.
As for the army, formerly it was the Roman’s privilege to fight as citizen and protector ofhis family and his
gods on behalf of the city of Rome. The cavalry had
taken precedence, then later the legionary. But the
growing needs of Empire had changed this; first the
professional army, then the recruitment of non-Roman
195
THE ROMANS 107
returns with the connivance of land inspectors. The
picture is terrible.
Yet it was precisely on these large estates owned by
the country aristocracy that culture of the old kind
flourished. In Gaul and Africa the landowners lived a
secluded life in their luxurious houses, corresponding
with one another (for letters were greatly in vogue as a
form of literature), discussing the literary merits of the
classical writers Vergil, Horace, Terence, Statius and
the rest. There were centres ofacademic studiesthroughout the Empire; and Gaul, especially, could claim
several of note, in particular that at Bordeaux. Literature was the favourite study, philosophy languished.
But in spite of the aridity of much of this study it was
pursued with an earnestness which is in a sense pathetic; for it proceeded from two contradictory and subconscious feelings -first, that the old culture was passing away; secondly, that it could never pass away, for
then nothing but void could be imagined.
Rutilius Claudius Namatianus was a member ofone of
the Gallic noble families, whose estates were ‘made ugly’
by the invading barbarians. His father had held office
in Rome and he himself had been Prefect ofthe City in
a.d. 413, six years after the law condemning paganism
and four years after Alaric’s descent upon Rome. In a
poem of 700 lines he tells the story of his unwilling
return from Rome to Gaul to look after his lands,
with what reluctance he tore himself away from the
city ‘where the sky is clearer above the seven hills’,
and as he leaves he utters amid his tears a grateful
prayer:
Rome is the Queen of the world, nurse of men and
mother of gods, whose majesty shall not fade from the
hearts of men till the sun itself is overwhelmed: her
gifts are as widely spread as the sun’s rays - the sun
198 THE ROMANS
which rises and sets on lands ruled by Rome. Her advance was held back neither by the scorching desert nor
the icy armoury of the north: wherever Nature had
fostered life, there Rome had penetrated. She had made
one fatherland of many nations, and to be brought
within her rule was a blessing. What was before the
world Rome had turned into one city, offering the
conquered partnership in her own law. Clemency had
tempered her might of arms: whom she had feared, she j
had overcome, and whom she had overcome she loved.
Embracing the whole world in her law - bringing victories, she had made all things live togetherjoined in a
common confederacy. Other empires had waxed and
waned: but Rome’s war had been righteous, her peace
free from pride, and glory had been added to her vast
resources. Her deeds had exceeded her destiny: what
she ruled was less than she deserved to rule ... And then
Rutilius calE upon Rome to summon to her aid her oid
courage and fortitude ... Despise the pain the wounds
will heal and the limbs grow strong. From adversity
snatch prosperity, from ruin riches. The heavenly
bodies set, only to renew their light: what cannot sink
leaps most quickly to the surface: the torch is dipped
that it may blaze more brightly. The foes of Rome, for
a moment victorious, were routed one and all and even
Hannibal lived to regret his success. The disaster which
wrecks others renews Rome; her power to thrive in
calamity will give her a second birth. Her enemies shall
be brought low, and eternally for Rome the Rhineland
shall be ploughed, the Nile shall overflow its banks, and
Africa and Italy and theWestshall lavish corn and wine.
The poem breathes much of the atmosphere of the
Rome of four centuries earlier; the gods are there, the
myths: places exercise their old charm, the old institutions receive due reverence, and the ‘ancient ways’ still
THE ROMANS
delight: the magic of Rome pervades all. There is no
hint that the old order has passed, Christianity receives
no mention; there is still the faith thatRome can emerge
triumphant. Rutilius is not alone, either as a devoted
Roman or as a provincial devoted to Rome. Claudian,
who was born in Egypt, cared not whether the Western
Emperor was Christian or pagan so long as he was
Emperor of Rome, for the Eastern upstart, Constantinople, he detested: his passion was the Senate and the
pagan institutions for which it stood. He also obstinately
clung to the past, and from the past created a Roman
future. The letters of Symmachus, too, relate in placid
calm the trivialities ofthe day, and assume the maintenance of the priestly colleges and the ordered routine
of the ancient worship. Yet he lived on friendly terms
with some of the most uncompromising enemies of
paganism. And there were many others like him.
There was, however, another place besides the houses
of Gallic nobles in which the culture of Greco-Roman
civilisation was preserved - within the Christian Church
itself, in the bishops’ houses and schools, in monasteries,
in Church foundations, and even in hermits’ cells. As is
well known, there had been a division ofopinion among
Christian writers and thinkers; some, like Tertullian,
were for destroying all that was pagan in origin; others,
like Clement of Alexandria, were for ‘spoiling the
Egyptians’. By the fifth century this conflict had largely
been resolved; and Christian leaders were often the besteducated men ofthe day. In these centres there was life
and enterprise; the Roman training in rhetoric found a
new outlet in the sermon and the theological treatises,
which were often published in instalments eagerly
awaited by their readers. Disputes with pagan supporters ofthe old learning gave opportunity for polemical pamphlets, while the necessary and voluminous
199
civilisation which Rome had taken under its wing was
now Greco-Roman civilisation and for its continuance
Rome was responsible. Within Greco-Roman civilisation there lay the possibility of perfection and finality.
Not that the world was perfect or that human institutions
were final, but within the ‘thought-forms’, ifthe phrase
may be used, at which that civilisation had painfully
arrived -in politics, in social ideals, in ethics, and in the
material expression ofthese things - there was the hope
ofperfection. This - and much more -is all contained in
the phrase ‘Eternal Rome’. Rome’s own spiritual experience, the union of that experience with the rest of
Mediterranean civilisation, and the resulting new crea ­
tion offered the framework within which lay the fortunes of humanity. Destroy those ‘thought-forms’, destroy the old culture of which thc' olcl gods were a part,
and humanity was doomed.
This was the challenge which Christian writers and
thinkers had to take up; and in taking it up they found
themselves much embarrassed, and chiefly for two reasons. In the first place, they were themselves the product - and often the finest product - of Greco-Roman
civilisation; and to think beyond it and outside it implied a supreme effort of thought and will. Secondly,
they owed it to the very tools with which they were
going to criticise, and many ofthem loved pagan literature with real devotion. Thus, they were engaged upon
the difficult task of an intellectual and emotional reorientation.
The point is capable ofillustration from many angles;
but it must suffice to consider only St Augustine, the
supreme example.
Before he became a Christian, St Augustine was a
teacher ofrhetoric in Italy; he knew Roman literature
well; he had read much Greek literature and philosophy
202 THE ROMANS
THE ROMANS
Christians make ofpagan thought is that it regards man
as sufficient of himself, that the world can be explained
by the world; their own creed is that, unless man invokes a principle outside himself, he can find no solution of his problems. Thus, it is no longer a matter of
securing the goodwill of the gods, for the successful
achievement of what men will; but of doing the will of
God, for its own sake, often in violation of what men,
left to themselves, would will. That is the point at issue,
as the Christians saw it. But that the difference was
beyond compromise did not mean that learning was
therefore to be cast aside. (The point perhaps might be
put shortly in this way, though this is not in St Augustine. Archimedes, when elaborating the theory oflevers,
had said that, ifonly he had a point offulcrum outside
the world, he would move the world. The Christian
believed that Greco-Roman thought attempted to move
the world from within and naturally failed; only
Christianity offered the principle from outside.)
Thus St Augustine argued with the supporters of the
old Roman worship. But on a lower plane he had
another task to perform, which had engaged the powers
of every Christian teacher for generations; he had to
wrestle with the gods and vague powers {daemons) who
possessed the minds of the less educated - the malign
‘influences’ ofastrology, the power of‘fortune’ and luck,
the ‘magic’ of spiritualists, the terrors of half-remembered superstitions, the cults of a thousand and one
little gods. These were the enslaving forces from which
the masses had to be liberated. That many native gods
took on a Christian guise as patron saints is well known,
and the process can be watched in some detail. But of
all this no more can be said.
With St Augustine we have reached the last great
name of antiquity. When he died in a.d. 430, the Van206
THE ROMANS
literature, till at last they were able to go to Greek
literature itself.
The barbarian invasions were neither catastrophic
and sudden, nor destructive and disruptive. Rome
never fell, she turned into something else. Rome, superseded as the source of political power, passed into even
greater supremacy as an idea; Rome, with the Latin
language, had become immortal.
208
CHAPTER XI
ROMAN LAW
Justice is the constant and perpetual will to give each man his right.
Digest OF JUSTINIAN
The greatest achievement ofthe Romans, whether we
consider it on its own intrinsic merits or in its influence
on the history ofthe world, is without doubt their law.
‘There is not a problem of jurisprudence,’ says Lord
Bryce, ‘which it does not touch: there is scarcely a corner ofpolitical science on which its light has not fallen.’
‘What the American law needs most to-day,’ says an
American lawyer, ‘is more of the invigorating eternal
influence of Roman law.’ And the same writer claims
that, whereas the population ofthe Roman Empire may
have been 50 millions, at present 870 million people
live under systems traceable to Roman law.
It is naturally impossible to explain satisfactorily in a
short chapter why Roman law is so supreme an achievement; yet not even the slightest book on the Romans
should therefore dismiss the subject. None the less, the
simplest account cannot help being difficult reading.
In a.d. 527 Justinian became Emperor of the East
Roman Empire, of which Constantinople was the
capital. For a hundred years or so Italy had been under the control of‘barbarian’ kings, Teutonic in origin.
In the middle of the century Justinian’s generals reconquered Italy, and till the twelfth century the East
Roman Empire maintained some hold upon it.
Soon after his accession Justinian gave orders that
Roman law should be codified. The codified Roman
law was published in a.d. 533 and it applied to the
210
East Roman Empire. When Italy was recovered, it
became law there also and thus it became known to the
West. Eventually schools and universities came into
being very largely to study it.Justinian’s great work is the
Corpus luris Civilis, the Corpus ofCivil Law, comprising
the Code (imperial statutes), the Digest (jurisprudence),
the Institutes (an elementary treatise), the Novellae
(later enactments from a.d. 535 to 565).
The question is: What were the qualities in Roman
law which earned for it so great and permanent an
influence? The answer to this question will throw light
on the qualities of the men who elaborated this law.
The Digest opens with these words of Ulpian:
‘Anyone intending to study law {ius), should first know
whence the word ius is derived. It was named ius from
justice: for, as Celsus aptly defined it, law is the art of
the good and the fair. It is by virtue ofthis that a man
might call us priests; for we worshipjustice, and we profess a knowledge of what is good and fair, separating
the fair from the unfair, discriminating between what
is allowed and what is not allowed, desiring to make
men good not merely by fear of penalties but by the
encouragement of rewards; we lay claim, unless I am
mistaken, to a true philosophy, not a sham philosophy.’
These seem at first sight strange words, yet they were
written by one of the greatest minds ofjurisprudence.
Law did in fact start with the priests, in Rome as
elsewhere; and Justinian, after a thousand years of
Roman law, claims that lawyers might well be regarded
as priests ofjustice. By 450 b.c, law was out ofthe hands
ofthe priests: customary unwritten law was now written
down in the Twelve Tables. They were published in the
forum, and they contained the law relating to Roman
citizens, ius civile. For three hundred years the Twelve
Tables were interpreted, and the new situations which
THE ROMANS 211
arose as Rome grew were met by logical deductions expanding the laws, or by legalfictionswhich keptthe letter
and enlarged the spirit. Less than a hundred years after
the publication ofthe Twelve Tables a special magistrate
was appointed to relieve the consuls of their judicial
powers. He was the praetor. In 242 b.c. another praetor
was appointed to deal specially with relations between
citizens and foreigners; he was called the. praetor perearims. At later dates the number was increased.
Now it must be noted (i) that the praetor was above
the law, (ii) that the fact that foreigners (Italians were
foreigners) and Roman citizens did business together
and were ready to refer disputes to the praetor peregrims
presupposed some likeness between the Roman and the
foreign conceptions oflaw, though not enough to make
a special judge unnecessary, (iii) that the praetor urbanus
and the praetor peregrims were required to publish at the
beginning oftheir year of office a statement ofthe rules
{edictum) which would guide them in theirinterpretation
of the law of the Twelve Tables, (iv) that the praetors
were elected by popular vote and were not necessarily
lawyers, though knowledge oflaw became increasingly
a qualification for office. But it is a feature of Roman
public life that all holders of office sought advice; the
Emperors later similarly sought advice. On these things
hangs much of the strength of Roman law.
The praetor was above the law. He could not annul
the existing law of the Twelve Tables, but by the
framing of his edict and by his day-to-day decisions he
could supplement it, or he could reform it by granting
remedial relief; the law stood, but he could make a way
round. The praetor peregrims had to deal with foreigners
not bound by Roman law; his task was to create out of
the customs of Romans and the customs offoreigners a
law acceptable to both. It was likely to be wider in
THE ROMANS
212 THE ROMANS
scope and less bound by local or national traditions; it
had to satisfy men as men, not men as citizens ofthis or
that state. The praetor urbanus thus built up the law of
citizens, ius civile) the praetor peregrims, who would draw
on the ius civile but would enlarge it by non-Roman
law, built up the ‘law of the nations’, ius gentium.
The praetor was appointed annually. It was therefore convenient for him to take over the edict of his predecessor, ifhe wished; but he could adapt it at the outset, and he could enlarge or modify it during his office.
It was in a state of perpetual growth; it was alive:
‘edictal law is the living voice { viva vox) ofthe civil law’.
Fresh minds were constantly at work on it.
In course of time Romans and Italians had more to
do with one another, till in 89 b.c. all Italians were
made Roman citizens. But hitherto they had come
under the ius gentium, administered by the praetor peregrinus, which was wider and more equitable than the
citizens’ law; and the citizens had learned something of
the nature of the ius gentium. So Italians, when they
became citizens, were not likely to accept anything less
wide, and existing Roman citizens were ready to accept
something wider. The result was that by a gradual process the civil law approached the wider law of the
nations. But of course citizenship involved much that
was refused to foreigners: and the superseding of civil
law by ius gentium did not take place till the second and
third centuries a.d.
Meantime, the provincial governor also issued his
edict to run in his province. He had held office in Rome
and he knew something oflaw. He studied the edict ofhis
predecessor, and modified it in the light ofhis experience.
He had to take into account local custom and prejudice,
the habits ofmind ofhis provincials; yet Roman notions
oflaw and order must prevail. He might pass to another
THE ROMANS
province where conditions would be different. He must
make the right adjustments in his attitude, taking local
differences into account. Yet Roman notions oflaw and
order must prevail. And, when he came back to take
his place in the Senate, his experience was worth
much; a council of state composed of men with such
experience has indeed been rare in history.
We have reached 89 b.c., and the answer to our
question must take note of these points: (i) the expansion of Rome and the growth of foreign trade and
relations brought into being the conception of a ‘law of
nations’, and necessitated its expression in concrete
form; (ii) this law affected and eventually superseded
the older ‘law ofthe citizens’; (iii) the process ofdevelopment implied in (i) and (ii) was made possible by
ihe device of ‘edictal law’, the ‘living voice’; development was not stunted or delayed, but was initiated by a
magistrate, himself above the law. So far, then, we have
[a) a capacity for change and development, {b) a conception oflaw which takes account ofmen as men, and
not only of citizens under a national law.
We now pass to the period ofthe Empire, though we
shall glance back to the Republic. Under the Republic
(except during the last years) the Senate’s decisions were
not law, but were only recommendations to the popular assembly. Under the early Empire the law-making
powers of the popular assemblies were virtually transferred to the Senate. From the reign of Tiberius to
Septimius Severus the Senate made law, though only
such law as the Emperor approved. The edictal law of
the praetor continued to grow. But in the reign of
Hadrian it was consolidated and codified and came to
an end. With the age of the Antonines, the Emperor’s
legislative power superseded all else. His ‘edict’ was
a general ordinance; his ‘decree’ was a judgement in a
213
214 the romans
suit submitted to him; his ‘rescript’ was his opinion on a
point of law. All of them made law.
Thus the whole tendency was to concentrate lawmaking power in the Emperor’s hands. The ‘living
voice’ of edictal law was silenced; the Senate was subservient. The distinction between civil law and the law
of nations was (for practical purposes) obliterated when
Caracalla bestowed citizenship on the Roman world in
a.d. 212. Yet the period from Trajan to Septimius
Severus, that is, the period when law-making power is
increasingly concentrated in the Emperor’s hands, is the
age of Classical Roman Law, the age in which two of
the influences which transformed it into a timeless
world law were most potent. These influences came from
(i) the jurisconsults; (ii) philosophy.
During the last seventy years or so ofthe Republic the
study oflaw was earnestly pursued by a number of able
and educated men, most of whom brought to their
studies a practical experience of office at home and of
administration in the provinces. Some were actively
engaged in practice in the law-courts, others were men
of letters who wrote upon legal subjects. They were
‘skilled in the law’, jurisprudentes ov juris consulti. In an
age when public life and problems of home and provincial administration occupied the best minds of the
day, knowledge oflaw was in demand. These ‘jurisprudents’ were freely consulted and they gave ‘opinions’
to those who consulted them. Their ‘answers’ to
problems were freely quoted and published and they
carxied great weight, since they came from men of
intellect, learning and practical experience. Such men
were Q, Mucius Scaevola, M. Junius Brutus (not the
assassin ofjulius Caesar), Servius SulpiciusRufus. Cicero
himself was an advocate rather than a jurist.
Such a position had these jurisprudentes reached in
T£l pjL.
216
A—
A1'' -*
THE ROMANS
fore had its laws; Reason in Nature was their source;
and these laws were outside and beyond man.
Now the Romans had already arrived at the notion
of an unwritten ‘law of nations’ through their dealings
with foreigners. The jurisprudentes were educated men,
of wide knowledge ofliterature and of philosophy, and
they were instinctively drawn to Stoicism with its stress
on standards of conduct. It was they who began to
equate the ‘law ofnations’ with the ‘law ofNature’, and
to believe that the law of nations was a faint approximation to the ‘law ofNature’. The aim oflaw thus was
to move closer to the objective standards enshrined in
the laws of Nature which were based on reason which
in turn was the reason, not of one man or one nation,
but of man as part of Nature. This was the point of
view of the jurisprudentes for over two hundred years;
and the result was that in all their labours of making
law, of amending and interpreting existing law, they
had a norm or a criterion to guide them, the ideal of
naturaljustice, of an objective good, more sublime and
more comprehensive than any ofman’s devising, which
lawyer and philosopher would strive to discover and
to embody- progressively in the laws of the Roman
Empire.
Thus we are brought back to the opening words of
the Digest quoted earlier in this chapter. ‘The art ofthe
good and the fair’, ‘desiring to make men good by the
encouragement of rewards’, ‘separating the fair from
the unfair’. ‘We worship justice’, and in a new sense the
lawyers were ‘priests’, concerned with absolute and
eternal values, valid for all men at all times and in all
places, which they strove to express in the form of
‘equity’ for the use of mankind.
But Roman law was not yet in such form that it could
be serviceable to mankind; it was of enormous bulk.
THE ROMANS 217
We may omit minor attempts at codification in the
third and fourth centuries, and come at once to the
Theodosian Code which went into effect in a.d. 439.
This Code was an official collection of the Emperors’
Statutes, and contained none ofthe writings of the jurists. It is ofgreat value to us, for it gives a picture ofthe
activities of the Christian Emperors, and of the social
conditions ofthe day; it exerted no little influence on
the ‘barbarian’ codes. For, when successive barbarian
aces overran the West, and Italy was subject to a
foreign government, the barbarians incorporated into
their own legal codes great masses ofRoman law. Thus
the Edict of Theodoric (a.d. 500) bound Roman and
Ostrogoth: the Code of Alaric II, the Visigoth, was
framed in a.d. 506, and based on the Theodosian Code,
on the Sententiae of Paulus the jurist, and on the Institutes of Gaius: and from it Western Europe derived
much of its knowledge of Roman law. There was also
die Lex Romana ofthe Burgundians (a.d. 517). But the
Code of Theodosius was not enough.
The great codification was that ofJustinian, as we
have seen. It included imperial statutes and it also distilled the writings of the jurists; what was obsolete was
omitted, and the whole was arranged in magnificent
order.Justinian claimed that three million lines ofjurisprudential law had been reduced to a hundred and fifty
thousand of the Digest, ‘a moderate compendium
through which you can easily see your way’ {moderatum
et perspicuum compendium). But into it had entered a
thousand years of practical wisdom, and that wisdom
had passed through Roman minds. There were no
violent innovations. The compilers ofthe Digest looked
back over the centuries of Roman law and conceived
their work as being part ofthe orderly progress initiated
by the infant Republic.
EPILOGUE
This book began by inviting attention to the sense of
self-subordination which marked the Roman mind.
‘Because you bear yourself as less than the gods, yoh
rule the world.’ In a thousand years the Romans had
been schooled as no other nation, and they had kept
that sense of subordination. None the less, no other
nation achieved an Empire so far-reaching and so fundamentally humane. Through obedience comes power.
The great gift of Roman obedience flowered in due
time into the great ideals of Roman law. By learning
at infinite cost that lesson Rome has set those ideals
upon succeeding ages. The Romans were ‘a law-inspired nation’, but the law was oftheir making and they
imposed it on themselves. And, as the fundamental
ideas of that law are studied, they will be found to en
shrine the ideals and qualities which the Romans ofthe
earliest times set before themselves, now broadened and
refined and made of universal application. Respect for
eternal values, the will of the gods (pietas), and thenexpression as objective ‘right’ in the practical things of
human life - respect for human personality and human
relationships (humanitas), whether in the family or the
state or the circle offriends, springing from a regard for
the personality of each individual and issuing in the
maintenance ofhis freedom (/z’iertoj — respect for tradition {mores) that holds fast to what has been handed
down because it contains accumulated wisdom which
no one moment and no one man can supply — respect
for authority {auctoritas), not as obedience to superior
power, but as regard for the judgement of men whose
THE ROMANS
experience and knowledge deserve respect — respect for
the pledged word (fides) and the expressed intention,
the faith ofthe Romans by which ‘with their friends and
such as relied on them they kept amity’, and ‘the most
sacred thing in life’.
Respect for these things presupposed training {disaplina), the training of the home, of public life, of life
itself, and the training which comes from the self
(severitas). And training of this kind creates a responsible cast of mind {gravitas) which assigns importance
to important things, so that, when once the hand is
placed to the plough, a man does not look back and
falter, but keeps to his purpose [constantia). These are
the qualities which make up the genius of the Roman
people.
219
222 THE ROMANS
249-1351 Decius
284-305 Diocletian
306-337 Constantine
361-363 Julian
379-395 Theodosius I (West)
527-565 Justinian (East)
313 Edict of Milan
265-340 Eusebius
325 Council of Nicaea
330 Foundation ofConstantinople
340-420 StJerome
354-430 St Augustine
384 Symmachus, prefect of
the City
404 Last poem of Claudian
410 Sack of Rome by Alaric
413 Rutilius Claudius Namatianus, prefect of the
City.
c. 420 Vegetius
438 Theodosian Code
455 Sack of Rome by Vandals
522 Reconquest of Italy by
Justinian
533 Promulgation of the
Digest
NOTE
A bibliography which would satisfy
readers who might wish to pursue topics
touched on in this book would occupy
many pages. It seems best therefore to
refer them to The Claim of Antiquity.
This pamphlet, issued by the Councils
of the Societies for the Promotion of
Hellenic and Roman Studies, is published by the Oxford University Press,
price one shilling. It contains an annotated list of books, arranged in subjects,
for those who do not read Greek or
Latin. It was last revised in 1935 and
is in print.